1 
 1. Introduction  
The rapidly urbanizing society and increasing quality of life demand reliable and intelligent 
infrastructure systems which are capable of catering to the societal needs at different scales – from an 
individual to the community level. Consequently, the civi l and infrastructure industry has undergone 
profound changes and is constantly evolving. However, the new -age designs and innovations in the civil 
and infrastructure industry can only be driven by a group of engineering graduates having 
multidisciplinary t raining and a sound understanding of emerging technologies. Through this 
undergraduate program in “Civil & Infrastructure Engineering”, IIT Jodhpur is making a stride to re -
imagine the course structure that incorporates and integrates the elements of conve ntional civil 
engineering with advanced transformative technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), cyber -
physical -systems (CPS), digital twins (DT), and automated management and information systems. 
Additionally, a major thrust is also planned on th e design, implementation, and maintenance of large -
scale integrated infrastructure systems across different domains.  
 
  
2. Objective of the program  
To provide an expanded but holistic understanding of different civil and infrastructure systems and an 
in-depth understanding of the differences, similarities, and relations between different scales and 
components of it.  
To produce graduates with an ability to integrate conventional methods with emerging technologies to 
design intelligent civil and infrastructure  systems from a multidisciplinary perspective.  
To provide exposure to techniques such as Internet -of-Things (IoT), machine learning, big data, cyber -
physical systems, and digital twin (DT) in the design and maintenance of different civil and infrastructure  
systems.  
 
 
3. Expected Graduate Attribute  
 
1. A strong foundation in the analytical, experimental, and computational methods to study various 
aspects of civil and infrastructure systems.  
2. A thorough understanding of green and sustainable materials, practices, a nd principles to design 
resilient infrastructure systems.  
3. An ability to understand real -world problems related to air and water pollution, solid waste 
management, ecological and environmental degradation, and their monitoring and remediation.  
4. Ability to a dopt safe methodologies coupled with advanced technologies in the design and 
construction of civil and infrastructure systems.  
5. Ability to monitor and evaluate health of old structures and renovating to bring sustainability.  
6. An understanding of the use of d igital twins (DT), cyber -physical -systems (CPS), internet -of-Things 
(IoT), artificial intelligence (AI) in designing, monitoring, surveillance and security of infrastructures.  
7. An innate ability to take multidisciplinary approach to problem solving and will ingness to go beyond 
conventional paths.  
8. Ability to engage in ethical and responsible practices while pursuing professional growth.  
 
4. Learning Outcome  
 
1. Strong understanding of structural engineering and its application in reinforced concrete, prestressed 
concrete, and steel structure design.  
2. In-depth knowledge of geotechnical engineering for ground improvement and foundation 
engineering.  
3. Knowledge of pavement design, traffic planning, and highway design for urban transport 
management.   
4. Knowledge of critic al experiments and advanced mathematical models for environmental engineering 
application.  
5. Knowledge of GIS and remote sensing for application in agriculture, environment, geo -resource 
exploitation, and constructing digital twin of built environment.  
2 
 6. Knowl edge of smart and sustainable material, and best practices for construction and infrastructure 
development.  
7. Strong foundation in computational methods and artificial intelligence (AI) for application in various 
civil and infrastructure problems.  
8. Knowledge  of cyber -physical -systems, advanced visualization techniques, and digital twins for 
application in smart infrastructure.  
9. Knowledge of town planning, logistics and layout engineering  
 
5. New Skill Sets Targeted  
 
1. The following advanced and new skill sets have  been targeted in the UG programme of Civil and 
Infrastructure Engineering at IIT Jodhpur:  
2. Capability to design and develop smart infrastructure systems integrating cutting -edge cyber -physical 
systems, and visualization techniques.  
3. A thorough understandin g of geological and geotechnical engineering as applicable in infrastructure 
development, natural disaster risk reduction and resilience, and geo -energy extraction.  
4. Knowledge of best practices, methods, and materials for sustainable Infrastructure planning, 
construction, and management.  
5. Preliminary knowledge of monitoring, evaluation, restoration, and renovation of existing and old 
infrastructures and maintenance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 6. Topic Clouds and Mapping of Topic Clouds with Proposed Courses (PC: Program Core; 
PE: Program Elective)  
 
 
Area   
Topics  
  
Courses  
Foundation Courses   
Probability Spaces; Random Variables; 
Estimation and Test of Hypothesis; Stochastic 
Processes  
 Probability, Statistics, and 
Stochastic Processes (LS)  
 
 
 
Geometrical Crystallography; Crystal Structure; 
Imperfections of Solids; Thermodynamics and 
Kinetics; Forms of Corrosion; Corrosion 
Protection; Structure -Property of Bulk Polymers; 
Viscoelasticity  
 Structure of Materials + 
Corrosion + Polymers (IE)  
 
Newtonian and Lagrangian Mechanics; Central 
Force Problem; Variational Principles and 
Lagrange’s Equations; Rigid body Motion  
 Introduction to Analytical 
Mechanics (LS)  
 
Signal and Systems; Frequency Domain; LTI 
System; Applications  
 Signals and Systems (IE) 
 
Basic Concepts; Energy Transfer; 
Thermodynamics Properties; Open and Closed 
System; Second law of Thermodynamics; 
Entropy; Exergy  
 Thermodynamics (IE)  
Geotechnical 
Engineering  Soil classification; index and engineering 
properties of soils; compaction and 
consolidation of soils; shear strength of soils; 
shallow and deep foundations; earth retaining 
structures   
Geotechnical Engineering 
(PC)  
 
 
Geotechnical Engineering 
Lab (PC)  
 
 
Rocks and minerals; Erosional and depositional 
processes of air, water, wind, and ocean; Seismic 
hazard; Landslide hazard; Volcanic hazard; Site 
inspection; Engineering geology  
 Geology for Civil Engineers 
(PE)  
4 
  
In-situ densification methods; preloading and 
dewatering techniques; mechanical and 
chemical stabilization of soils; grouting and 
geosynthetics  Ground Improvement 
Techniques (PE)  
Vibration theory; wave propagation; cyclic 
behavior of soils; seismic ground motion; 
dynamic soil properties; geophysical testing; 
seismic soil liquefaction; seismic microzonation; 
seismic slope stability; seismic response of 
retaining walls  Introduction to Soil 
Dynamics (PE)  
 
Stresses and strains in soils; stress path for  total 
and effective stress; critical state soil mechanics; 
load transfer mechanism of shallow and pile 
foundations; structural health monitoring of 
geotechnical structures; introduction to 
computational geomechanics  Advanced Geotechnical 
Engineering (PE)  
Water Resources 
Engineering   
Introduction, Evapotranspiration and 
infiltration, Runoff, Hydraulic analysis and 
design, Dams and reservoirs, Role of economics 
in water resources planning, Irrigation, 
Groundwater  
 Water Resources 
Engineering (PC)  
 
Fluid statics, Kinematics of fluids, 
Incompressible Inviscid flow, Internal 
Incompressible Viscous flow, External 
Incompressible Viscous flow, Dimensional 
analysis and similarity, Turbulent flows, 
Compressible flow, Industrial Applications  Fluid Mechanics (PC)  
 
Water food industry nexus, transport from 
precipitation to groundwater, modeling 
hydrologic cycles; precipitation trends and 
frequencies; Infiltration and soil Moisture 
Management; peak runoff and stormwater 
runoff; Streams; Floods and Hydraulic Control 
Structures; Detention and Retention ponds; 
ground water mapping  Environmental Hydrology 
(PE)  
Construction and 
Infrastructure   
Construction materials, Building construction, 
Building estimates, Introduction to project 
planning and network analysis  
 Constru ction Technology 
and Practices(PC)  
 
Concrete materials; strength; durability; 
batching, mixing and transportation; curing;  
microstructure of concrete; mix design; 
admixtures; quality control; special types of 
concrete.  
 Concrete Technology (PE)  
5 
 Urban and rural infrastructure planning; risks 
associated; project governance; infrastructure 
maintenance; innovative infrastructure 
financing; polycentric governance  Infrastructure Planning and 
Management Engineering 
(PE)  
Environmental 
Engineering   
Sources of wastewater; primary and secondary 
treatment methods; sludge characteristics; Air 
pollutants; Effect of air pollution of human 
health, vegetation, and materials; Pollution 
monitoring; Control equipments; Indoor air 
pollutions; Management of solid waste; 
Environmental Risk Assessment; Treatment of 
hazardous waste  
 Environmental Engineering  
(PC)  
 
Sources and classification of air pollutants; Air 
Quality standards; Aerosol dynamics; Pollutant 
removal; Meteorology; Dispersion modelling; 
Effects of Air Pollution  
 Air pollution and Control 
(PE)  
 
Mass balance; Reaction kinetics; Micro and 
macro transport processes; modelling of aquatic 
systems; Oxygen model; Temperature model; 
Gaussian plume model and modifications; 
Dispersion models; Acid rain modeling,  
dissolved oxygen modelling and add reactor 
models  
 Mathematical Modelling in 
Environmental System (PE)  
 
Waste types; Sources of waste; Recycling; Waste 
to energy; Treatment and disposal of waste; 
Nuclear, biomedical, and steel waste.  
 Industrial Waste: Control 
and Utilization (PE)  
Climate and Climate Change; Convection 
motion and Atmospheric circulations; Role of 
Oceans; Radiative Heat Transfer; Climate 
feedbacks; Climate variability; Climate 
sensitivity; Global Circulation Model  Climate change and Impact 
(Specialization stream core)  
Photogrammetry; Multispectral remote Sensing; 
Thermal infrared Remote Sensing; Microwave 
Remote Sensing; LIDAR; GPS; GIS; Application 
of GIS, Use of Drones  Geoinformatics (PC)  
 
Basics of Microbiology; Kinetics and Reactors; 
The activated sludge process; Nitrification and 
denitrification; Phosphorus removal; Drinking 
water treatment; Anaerobic treatment by 
methanogenesis; Detoxification of hazardous 
chemicals; Bioremediation  Environmental 
Biotechnology and 
Bioremedia tion (PE)  
Transportation 
Engineering   
Introduction to transportation engineering, 
Transportation planning, Geometric design, 
Pavement engineering, Traffic engineering  
 Transportation Engineering 
(PC)  
6 
  
Highway cross section elements and geometric 
design,  Horizontal and vertical alignment, 
Intersection design, Traffic signs and road 
markings – guidelines and principles, Pedestrian 
facilities, cycle track, Bus bays, Design layout for 
On-street and Off -street parking, Smart city 
roads  
 Highway Geometric Desi gn 
(PE)  
 
Pavement materials, Analysis and stresses in 
pavements, Factors affecting pavement design, 
Design of pavements  
 Pavement Engineering (PE)  
 
Urban transportation planning process and 
concepts, Travel demand estimation, Mode split 
and route split  analysis, Landuse -
Transportation models  
 Urban Transportation 
Planning (PE)  
 
Road, user, and vehicle characteristics of traffic 
system; Traffic control devices; control 
hierarchy; ANN and Fuzzy logic concepts; 
Intelligent Transport System (ITS); ITS user 
services; framework for planning, defining, and 
integrating ITS  
 Traffic System and ITS (PE)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Structural Engineering  Stress and strain, Mechanical behaviour, Static 
analysis, Elastic bending, Elastic torsion Strain 
energy, Elastic buckling  Mechanics of solids (PC)  
 
Working stress and limit state method of design 
of RCC structures; design of beam - singly 
reinforced, doubly reinforced beam; detailing of 
reinforcement; serviceability criteria; design of 
slab - one way and two way sl ab; design of 
column - axial loading, uniaxial bending, biaxial 
bending, slender column; design of foundation - 
isolated and combined footing.  
 Reinforced Concrete Design 
(PC)  
 
Constitutive relations and compatibility 
conditions; axial force, shear force  and bending 
moment; moment area method; conjugate beam 
method; principle of virtual work; strain energy 
method; Maxwell -Betti law; force method; 
energy method; three moment equation; 
influence lines; cables, suspension bridges and 
arches; settlement and t emperature effects.  Structural Analysis (PC)  
 
Indeterminate structures; force method of 
analysis; displacement method; stress and strain 
tensors; plastic analysis; basics of FEM; stability 
of structure; introduction to structural 
dynamics.  Advanced Structural 
Analysis (PC)  
7 
  
Structural steel sections; design concepts - 
working stress design, limit state design; design 
of connections; welded connections; design of 
tension and compression members, concept of 
stability and buckling; design of flexural 
members; design against shear.  
 Steel Structure Design (PE)  
 
Mix design of concrete; P -M, M -phi 
relationships; strut -and-tie method; design of 
deep beam and corbel; design of shear walls; 
compression field theory; design against torsion; 
stability design  of steel structures; torsional 
buckling; design of beam -columns; fatigue 
resistant design; fire rating.  Advanced Structural 
Design (PE)  
 
Mass -spring -damper system; equation of 
motion; Hamilton’s principle; single and 
multiple degree of freedom system; damped and 
undamped systems; natural frequencies and 
modes; damping in structures; basics of 
earthquake response and vibration control.  Dynamics of Structure (PE)  
 
Governing equation and its solution 
approximations; calculus of variations; 
Lagrangian and  serendipity elements; analysis 
of framed structures; axisymmetric problems; 
3D stress analysis; analysis of plate and shell; 
numerical integration and convergence; 
application of FEM in dynamics.  
 Finite Element Method (PE)  
Types of prestressing; pre - and post -tensioning 
systems; losses in prestress; anchorage slip; 
analysis and design of members for axial, 
flexure, shear and torsion loading; deflection, 
camber and crack width; transmission of 
prestress - pre- and post -tensio ned members; 
analysis and tendon profile of cantilever and 
continuous beams;   
design of composite sections, slabs, compression 
members etc.  Prestressed Concrete 
Structure (PE)  
Prefabrication materials; modular coordination 
and standardization; site erec tion; quality 
control; prefabricated components; construction 
of panel, roof and floor slabs, wall panels, 
columns, shear walls; design of cross section; 
joint flexibility and deformation; design of 
expansion joints; design for extreme loads.  Prefabricated  Structures 
(PE)  
 
Review of structural dynamics; structural health 
management; vibration -based techniques for 
SHM; modal assurance criterion (MAC); 
damage localization and quantification; 
frequency domain decomposition (FDD); time -
domain damage detection  methods; 
autoregressive (AR) and autoregressive with 
exogenous input (ARX) models; ANN approach  
Introduction to Structural 
Health Monitoring (PE)  
 
8 
 to SHM; predictive health monitoring; Bayesian 
model updating; piezo -electric materials; 
electro -mechanical impedance (EMI) technique; 
data acquisition systems ; fibre -optics sensors; 
sensor optimization, placement and layout 
design.  
 
Source of earthquakes; response spectrum; 
frequency domain analysis; time domain 
analysis; nonlinear earthquake analysis: 
earthquake resistance design; concepts of 
passive controls; geotechnical aspects.  
 Earthquake Engineering 
(PE)  
 
 
Smart Infrastructure 
Technology   
Algorithm analysis and complexity; Abstract 
Data Types; Search Trees; Heaps; Sets; Greedy 
Techniques; Sorting  Algorithms; Hashing; 
Dynamic Programming; Graph Algorithms  
 Data Structure and 
Algorithm (PC)  
 
Regression and Supervised Classifiers; Linear 
Decision boundaries; Unsupervised Learning; 
Time Series; Artificial Neural Network  
 Introduction to Machine 
Learning (IE)  
 
 
Various infrastructure systems; need of smart 
infrastructure; data acquisition and applications; 
data analysis using AI and ML techniques and 
their applications in infrastructure systems; 
control systems applications in infrastructure; 
design of smart infrastructure with adaptive 
capabilities.  Smart Infrastructure 
Engineering (PC)  
 
Review of artificial neural networks - supervised 
and unsupervised learning  
networks; genetic programming; applications in 
infrastructure engineering – prediction, 
structural control, damage assessment, ground 
settlement, uncertainty quantification, surrogate 
modelling etc.  
 AI/ML in Infrastructure 
Engineering (PE)  
 
 
 
 
Classification of building services; Hot and cold 
water supply; Fire prevention and control; Gas 
and storage; Mechanical services; Heating and 
cooling; Electricity supply and distribution; 
Acoustics  
 Building Services (PE)  
 
Intelligent architecture and Structure; BAS and 
BAS communication standards; LAN; Light 
control and security; Smar t and optimal control  
 Intelligent Buildings (PE)  
 
 
Introduction to surveillance, critical 
infrastructures, building security and control Surveillance and Security of 
Infrastructures (PE)  
 
9 
 system, surveillance and security of transport 
infrastructure  
 
 
Cyber -physical systems applications in civil 
engineering; instrumentation; wireless 
communications and networks; energy and 
power sources; stability and rick monitoring 
using CPS  Cyber -Physical Systems for 
Infrastructure (PE)  
 
 
 
Digital twin types; Sensors, computation, and 
visualization; Standards and frameworks; 
Application: construction, building, smart city, 
energy assets, transport, water  
 Digital Twin and Asset 
management (PE)  
 
 Design and simulation experiments for smart 
infrastructures  Smart  Infrastructure: 
Design and Simulation 
(Lab)  
 
 
Infrastructure Systems   
Power plant infrastructure planning and design; 
hydroelectric infrastructure; thermal energy 
infrastructure; pipelines in power infrastructure; 
nuclear energy infrastructure; smart grid, 
transmission and distribution.   
Introduction to Power 
Infrastructure Engineering 
(PE)  
Thermal energy infrastructure; plant 
configuration; repair and maintenance; cooling; 
risk assessment; design of chimney; power plant 
waste – fly ash and its reuse; flue gas 
desulfurization; nuclear energy infrastructure; 
project implementation; radioactive waste and 
management; facilities and basic infrastructure.  Thermal and Nuclear 
Power Infrastructure 
Engineering (PE)  
 
Railway operational system, design elements, 
and maintenance; High speed rails, elevated and 
underground rails; Airport system planning; 
Airfield layout planning; Passenger and cargo 
terminal planning; Airport -landuse 
compatibility planning  
 Infrastructure planning and 
design for rail and a ir 
transport (PE)  
Fundamental elements of planning harbours 
and ports; Design of port and harbour 
structures, Operations, management, and 
maintenance of port infrastructures  Infrastructure planning and 
design for ports and 
harbours (PE)  
 
Functions and components of 
telecommunication; Design, operation, and 
maintenance of towers; Telecom network 
management; Components of IT infrastructures; 
Network and servers; Network security; Role 
and applications of big data; Information and 
communication technology in urban services  
 IT and Telecom 
Infrastructure (PE)  
 Green Building and 
Sustainable Materials (PE)  
10 
 Design; Assessment; sustainable site and 
landscape; energy and carbon footprint; Built 
environment hydrological cycle; Green 
materials; Indoor environmental quality; Green 
building economics  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 7. Course Categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. Programmes  
 
S.
N.  Course Type  Course Category  Regular B. Tech.  Double B. Tech.  
Cred
it  Total  Credit  Total  
1 Institute Core (I)  
 Engineering (IE)  34 69 34 59 
Science (IS)  16 16 
Humanities (IH)  12 9 
2 Programme 
Linked (L)  Science (LS)  7 0 
3 Programme Core 
(P) Programme Compulsory (PC)  50 71 50 71 
Programme Electives (PE)  18 18 
B.Tech. Project (PP)  3 3 
4 Open (O)  Open Electives (OE)  10 10 0 0 
5 Engineering 
Science (E)  Engineering Science Core (EC)  0 0 22 30 
Engineering Science Elective 
(EE)  0 8 
Total Graded  150  160 
6 Non -Graded (N)  Humanities (NH)  6 15 6 15 
Engineering (NE)  3 3 
Design/Practical Experience 
(ND)  6 6 
Total Graded + Non -Graded  165  175 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 8. Credit Structure of B. Tech. Programme  
 
Type  L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact hours  Total credit 
(TC = TH/3)  Contact Hours 
(CH)  Beyond Contact 
Hours (BCH)  Total 
Hours (TH)  
1 Hour of Lecture  1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 1 
1 Hour of Tutorial  0-1-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 1 
1 Hour of Lab/Project  0-0-1 1 hr 0.5 hr  1.5 0.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 9. List of programme compulsory courses  
 
Sr. No  Course Name  L-T-P Contact Hours  Credit  
1  
Mechanics of solids  3-1-0 4 4 
2  
Transportation Engineering  3-0-0 3 3 
3  
Fluid Mechanics  3-1-2 6 5 
4  
Geoinformatics  3-0-2 5 4 
5  
Structural Analysis  3-0-2 5 4 
6  
Environmental Engineering  3-0-2 5 4 
7 a. Geotechnical Engineering  3-1-0 4 4 
b. Geotechnical Engineering Lab  0-0-2 2 1 
8  
Water Resources Engineering  3-0-2 5 4 
9  
Reinforced Concrete Design  3-0-2 5 4 
10  
Smart Infrastructure Engineering  3-0-0 3 3 
11  
Advanced Structural Analysis  3-0-2 5 4 
12  
Construction Technology and Practices  3-0-2 5 4 
13  
Data Structure and Algorithm  3-0-2 5 4 
Total  52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 10. Area -wise Programme Elective (PE) Courses  
 
 
Area  
  
Courses  
  
L-T-P 
  
Credit  
 Smart Infrastructure 
Technology   
AI/ML in Infrastructure Engineering  
  
3-0-0  
3 
 
Building Services  
 3-0-0 3 
 
Intelligent Buildings  
 3-0-0 3 
 
Surveillance and Security of Infrastructures  
 3-0-0 3 
 
Cyber -Physical Systems for Infrastructure  
 3-0-0  
3 
 
Digital Twin and Asset management  
 3-0-0 3 
Geotechnical 
Engineering   
Geology for Civil Engineers  
 3-0-0 3 
 
Ground Improvement Techniques  
 3-0-0 3 
 
Introduction to Soil Dynamics  
 3-0-0 3 
 
Advanced Geotechnical Engineering  
 3-0-0 3 
Environmental 
Engineering   
Air pollution and Control  
 3-0-0 3 
 
Mathematical Modelling in Environmental 
System  
 3-0-0  
3 
 
Industrial Waste: Control and Utilization  3-0-0 3 
 
Environmental Biotechnology and Bioremediation  3-0-2 4 
Transportation 
Engineering   
Highway Geometric Design  3-0-0 3 
 
Pavement Engineering  
 3-0-0 3 
 
Traffic System and ITS  
 3-0-0 3 
 
Urban Transportation Planning  
 3-0-0 3 
Construction and 
Infrastructure  Concrete Technology  3-0-0 3 
 Infrastructure Planning and Management  3-0-0 3 
Structural  Engineering   
Steel Structure Design  
 3-1-0 4 
 
Advanced Structural Design  
 3-0-0 3 
 
Dynamics of Structure  
 3-0-0 3 
15 
  
Finite Element Method  
 3-0-0 3 
Prestressed concrete structures  3-0-0 3 
Prefabricated structures  3-0-0 3 
 
Earthquake Engineering  
 3-0-0 3 
 
Introduction to Structural Health monitoring  
 3-0-0 3 
 
Water Resources 
Engineering  
 Environmental Hydrology  3-0-2 4 
Infrastructure Systems  Introduction to Power Infrastructure Engineering  3-0-0 3 
Thermal and nuclear power infrastructure 
Engineering  3-0-0 3 
Infrastructure planning and design for rail and air 
transport  3-0-0 3 
Infrastructure planning and design of ports and 
harbours  3-0-0 3 
IT and Telecom Infrastructure  3-0-0 3 
Green Building and Sustainable Materials  3-0-0 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 11. Curriculum of B.Tech. Civil and Infrastructure Engineering (Regular)  
 
Cat Course  LTP C
H NC GC Cat Course  LTP C
H NC GC 
 I Semester   II Semester  
IE Engineering 
Mechanics  2-1-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction 
to Electrical 
Engineering  3-0-2 5 - 4 
IS Chemistry  3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction 
to Computer 
Science  3-0-2 5 - 4 
IS Physics  3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction 
to 
Bioengineerin
g 3-0-2 5 - 4 
IS Chemistry Lab  0-0-2 2 - 1       
IS Physics Lab  0-0-2 2 - 1 0      
IS Mathematics I  3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II  3-1-0 4 - 4 
IE Engineering 
Visualization  0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering 
Realization  0-0-2 1 - 1 
NE Engineering 
Design I  0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering 
Design II  0-0-2 2 1 - 
NH Communication 
Skill I  0-0-2 2 1 - NH Communicatio
n Skill II  0-0-2 2 1 - 
NH Social Connect 
and 
responsibilities I  0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Social Connect 
and 
responsibilitie
s II 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 
NH Performing Arts 
I /Sports I  0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Performing 
ArtsII/Sports 
II 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 
Total  11-2-
12 25 3 16 Total  12-1-
14 2
6 3 17 
 III Semester   IV Semester  
LS Probability,Stati
stics and 
Stochastic 
Process  3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Structure of 
Materials  
Corrosion  
Polymers  3 ×  
1-0-0   3 - 3 
IE Thermodynamic
s 3-1-0 4 - 4 PC Mechanics of 
solids  3-1-0 6  4 
PC Geoinformatics  3-0-2 6  4 PC Fluid 
Mechanics  3-1-2 6  5 
IE Introduction to 
Machine 
Learning  3-0-2 5 - 4 IE Signals and 
Systems  3-1-0 4 - 4 
LS Introduction to 
Analytical 
Mechanics  3-0-0 3 - 3 IH Humanities I  3-0-0 3 - 3 
NE Intro. To 
Profession  0-0-2 2 1  PC Data Structure 
and Algorithm  3-0-2 3 - 4 
Total  15-2-6 24 1 19 Total  18-1-6 2
5 - 23 
 V Semester   VI Semester  
17 
 PC Transportation 
Engineering  3-0-0 3  3 PC Water 
Resources 
Engineering  3-0-2 5  4 
PC Structural 
Analysis  3-0-2 5  4 PC Reinforced 
Concrete 
Design  3-0-2 5  4 
PC Environmental 
Engineering  3-0-2 5  4 PC Smart 
Infrastructure 
Engineering  3-0-0 3  3 
PC Geotechnical 
Engineering  3-1-0 4  4 PC Advanced 
Structural 
Analysis  3-0-2 5  4 
PC Construction 
Technology and 
Practices  3-0-2 5  4 PC Geotechnical 
Engineering 
Lab 0-0-2 2  1 
IH Humanities II  3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Programme/O
pen Elective  3-0-0 3  3 
NH Professional 
Ethics I  0-1-0  1 - NH Professional 
Ethics II  0-1-0  1 - 
Total  18-2-6 25 1 22 Total  15-1-8 2
3 1 19 
 VII Semester   VIII Semester  
PP B. Tech. Project  0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV  3-0-0 3 - 3 
PE/ 
OE Programme/Op
en Electives  8-0-0 8 - 8 PE
/ 
OE Programme/O
pen Electives  15-0-0 1
5 - 15 
IH Humanities III  3-0-0 3 - 3       
IS Environmental 
Science  2-0-0 2 - 2       
Total  13-0-6 19 - 16 Total  18-0-0 1
8 - 18 
Total of Graded Credit  - 150 
Non -Graded Credit  9 - 
Non -Graded Design Credits  6 - 
Grand Total   165 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
 12. B.Tech. with Specialization  
The students can obtain a Departmental Specialization after completing additional 20 credits beyond the 
regular B.Tech. program credit requirement. From the 20 credits, 8 credits must be taken from core areas 
of that specialization and 12 credits should be  taken from the electives within that specialization.  
 
i. B Tech with Specialization in Environmental Engineering  
(Total credits: 20; Core credits: 8; Specialization Electives: 12)  
S. No.  Core Courses  Course Credits  
1. Fate of Chemicals in the Environment  3-0-0 [3]  
2. Climate Change and Impact     3-0-4 [5]  
 
S. No.  Electives  Course Credits  
1. Remote Sensing and GIS for Environment Management  3-0-2 [4]  
2. Solid Waste Management  3-0-0 [3]  
3. Air Pollution and Control  3-0-0 [3]  
4. Advanced Wastewater Treatment  3-0-2 [4]  
5. Environmental Economics and Management  3-0-0 [3]  
6. Environmental Impact Assessment  3-0-0 [3]  
7. Machine Learning for Environmental Engineering.  3-0-0 [3]  
8. Geomorphology  3-0-0 [3]  
9. GIS and Public Health  3-0-0 [3]  
10. Environmental Biotechnology and Bioremediation  3-0-2 [4]  
11 Specialization Project (maximum 6 credits)  0-0-12 [6]  
 
ii. B.Tech. with Specialization in Smart Infrastructure  
(Total credits: 20; Core credits: 8; Specialization Electives: 12)  
S. No.  Core Courses  Course Credits  
1.  Cyber -Physical Systems for Infrastructure  3-0-0 [3]  
2.  AI/ML in Infrastructure Engineering  3-0-0 [3]  
3.  Smart Infrastructure: Design and Simulation  0-0-4 [2]  
 
S. No.  Electives  Course Credits  
1.  Transmission Infrastructure  3-0-0 [3]  
2.  Thermal and Nuclear Power Infrastructure Engineering  3-0-0 [3]  
3.  Surveillance and Security of Infrastructures  3-0-0 [3]  
4.  Digital Twin and Asset management  3-0-0 [3]  
5.  Introduction to Power Infrastructure Engineering  3-0-0[3] 
6.  Infrastructure planning and  design for rail and air transport  3-0-0 [3]  
7.  IT and Telecom Infrastructure  3-0-0 [3]  
8.  Specialization Project (maximum 6 credits)  0-0-12 [6]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
 13. Detailed Course Contents  
 
Title  Data Structures and Algorithms  Number  CS2XX0  
Department  Computer Science and Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-2 [4]  
Offered for  B.Tech of all branches  Type  Program Core (PC)  
Prerequisite  Introduction to Computer Programming    
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
To introduce and practice the implementation of various data structures used for indexing, searching, and 
sorting operations.  
To introduce basic mathematical techniques for algorithm analysis and design.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students will have the ability to:  
Ability to design and implement appropriate data struct ures for indexing, searching, and sorting operations 
for real -world problems.  
Designing of new algorithms using standard data structures.  
Analyzing the time and space complexities of standard data structures and basic algorithms  
 
Contents  
Algorithm analysis and complexity: Big/little -Oh, Omega, Theta notation, Recurrence equations (2 
Lectures)  
Abstract data types: Linear data structures, Tree, Binary trees, Tree traversal, Applications (7 Lectures)  
Search trees: Binary search trees, Balanced search trees, AVL trees, B -Trees (5 Lectures)  
Heaps: Binary Heap, Heap order property and min/max heaps (3 Lectures)  
Sets: Disjoint set ADT, Basic operations on Sets, Union/Find Algorithm (2 Lectures)  
Greedy techniques for algorithm design (1 lecture)  
Sorting alg orithms: Bubble sort, Selection sort, Bucket sort, Insertion sort, Overview of Divide -and-conquer, 
Quick sort, Merge sort (6 Lectures)  
Hashing: Hash tables and operations, Hash function, Open and closed hashing, External and internal 
hashing, Collision res olving methods, Rehashing (5 Lectures)  
Dynamic programming for problem solving (3 Lectures)  
Graph algorithms: Definitions, Branch and bound, Backtracking, Representation, Traversal, Shortest -path 
algorithms, Minimum Spanning Tree algorithm, Topological sor ting (8 Lectures)  
 
Laboratory  
Implementation of data structures using C programming language.  
Practically verifying and comparing run -time performance and asymptotic behavior of various data 
structures and related algorithms.  
Applications of data structur es from real -life scenarios.  
 
Text Books  
M. A. WEISS (2002), Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C, Addison -Wesley, 2nd Edition.  
 
Reference Books  
T. H. CORMEN, C. E. LEISERSON, R.L. RIVEST, C. STEIN (2009), Introduction to Algorithms, MIT Press, 
3rd Edition.  
 
Online course Material  
Data Structures and Algorithms, NPTEL Course Material, Department Computer Science and Engineering, 
IIT Delhi: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102064/  
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 Title  Structure of Materials  Number  MTL2XX0  
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering  L-T-P [C]  1–0–0 [1]  
Offered for  B.Tech.  Type  Institute Core – 
Engineering (IE)  
Prerequisite  -     
Objectives  
1. Introduce the concept of crystal structure, atomic planes and directions  
2. Introduce the concept of atomic packing, coordination, and symmetry elements  
3. Introduce imperfections in solids  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1. Understand the atomic arrangement in crystalline materials  
2. Describe the periodic arrangement of atoms in terms of unit cell parameters  
3. Identify various kinds of defects  
 
Contents  
Introduction: [3 lectures] Classification of materials, crystalline and non -crystalline solids, atomic bonding  
Geometrical Cry stallography: [3 lectures] Symmetry elements: the operation of rotation, Proper and Improper 
rotation axes, Screw axes, Glide planes  
Crystal Structure: [4 lectures] Crystal Lattice, Unit Cell, Planes and directions in a lattice, Planar Atomic 
Density, pack ing of atoms and packing fraction, Classification and Coordination of voids, Bragg’s Law  
Imperfections in Solids: [3 lectures] Types of imperfections, Point defects: vacancies, interstitials, line defects, 
2-D and 3 -defects, Concept of free volume in amorp hous solids.  
 
Textbook  
Azaroff, L.V., (2001) Introduction to solids, 1st Edition, McGraw Hill Book Company  
 
Reference Books  
Callister Jr, W.D., Rethwisch, D.G., (2018), Materials Science and Engineering: An Introduction, 10th Edition, 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley  
 
Online Course Material  
1. Prasad, R.,   Introduction to Materials Science and Engineering, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113102080/  
2. Subramaniam, A., Structure of Materials, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Material Science and 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur,  https://npte l.ac.in/courses/113104014/   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
 Title  Corrosion  Number  MTL2XX0  
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering  L-T-P [C]  1–0–0 [1]  
Offered for  B. Tech  Type  Institute Core – 
Engineering (IE)  
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
1. Introduce to different forms of corrosion  
2. Elucidate thermodynamics and kinetics of corrosion  
3. Teach different protection mechanisms against corrosion  
  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to:  
1. Understand corrosion under different environments  
2. Understand the thermodynamics and kinetics of corrosion  
3. Know protection methods against corrosion  
 
Contents  
Introduction and Motivation: [2 lecture] Economics, forms of corrosion, des ign, basics of Electrochemistry  
Thermodynamics and Kinetics: [6 lectures]  Nernst equation, Pourbaix diagram, Rate expression, Exchange 
current density, Polarization, Tafel Equation, Mixed Potential Theory -Galvanization, Passivation, corrosion 
measurement  
Forms of Corrosion: [5 lectures] Major forms of corrosion (e.g. uniform, g alvanic, crevice corrosion, stress 
corrosion, Hydrogen embrittlement, sulphate attack, etc.), Oxidation, Pilling Bedworth ratio, corrosion of 
steel, Al, and concrete, microbial corrosion  
Corrosion Protection: [1 lecture] Cathodic and anodic protection, Inh ibitors, coatings  
 
Textbook  
Fontana, M.G., (2017) Corrosion Engineering, 3 rd Edition, McGraw Hill  
 
Reference Books  
1. Ahmad, Z., (2006), Principles of Corrosion Engineering and Corrosion Control, Elsevier  
2. Revie, W.R., Uhlig, H.H., (2008) Corrosion and Corrosion Control, 4th edition, Wiley  
 
Online Course Material  
1. Natarajan, K.A., Advances in Corrosion Engineering,  
Department of Materials Engineering, IISc Bangalore,  
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113108051/  
2. Mondal, K., Corrosion I, Department of Material Science and  
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/104/113104082/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
 Title  Polymers  Number  CHL2XX0  
Department  Chemical Engineering  L-T-P [C]  1-0-0 [1]  
Offered for  B.Tech.  Type  Institute Core - 
Engineering (IE)  
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
Provide basic background to structure and properties of polymeric materials  
  
Learning Outcomes  
1. The students are expected to have the ability to:  
2. Understand the basic classifications and synthesis of polymers  
3. Correlate the structure of polymers with properties  
  
Contents  
Background: [3 lectures] Terminologies, classification of polymers, Amorphous & semi -crystalline polymer, 
biopolymers, Functional group reactivity, classification of polymerization reactions  
Structure -Property in Bulk Polymer: [6 lectures] Glass transition, crystal structure, crystallinity and melting 
in polymer, mechanical properties -stress -strain relationship, Electrical properties: Dielectric properties, 
conduction in polymers  
Introduction to Viscoelasticity: [3 lectures] Mechanical models -Kelvin model, Maxwell model, Voigt model  
Applications: [2 lectures] Polymer composites, polymers for electronic packaging  
  
Textbook  
Young, R.J., and Lovell, P.A. (2011), Introduction to Polymers, 3rd Edition, CRC Press  
  
Reference Books  
BillMeyer, F.W., (2007), Textbook of Polymer Science, 3rd Edition, Wiley  
  
Online Course Material  
Adhikari, B., Science and Technology of Polymers, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Meta llurgical & 
Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113105028/   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
 Title  Introduction to Machine Learning  Number  CS2XX0  
Department  Computer Science and Engineering / 
Electrical Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-2 [4]  
Offered for  B.Tech of all branches  Type  Institute Core – 
Engineering (IE)  
Prerequisite  Introduction to Computer Programming    
Objectives  
1. To familiarize with the fundamental machine learning algorithms.  
2. To study applications of machine learning algorithms in different disciplines.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1. Ability to formulate a machine learning problem  
2. Ability to select an appropriate machine learning algorithm for analysing different types of data.  
3. Ability to apply pattern analysis tools to practical applications and detect patterns in the data.  
 
Content  
Preliminaries: ML pipeline, training, testing, Learning Paradigms: Supervised, unsupervised, and 
reinforcement, R epresentation of samples, Correlation and covariance, probability, distributions, hypothesis 
evaluation, Data processing and normalization, Bias -Variance (8 lectures)  
Regression and Supervised Classifiers (18 lectures):  
Logistic and Linear Regression (2),  
Decision Tree, Boosting and Bagging, K -NN (5)  
Bayesian Decision Theory, MLE Parameter Estimation (5)  
EM-Algorithms (2 lectures)  
SVM (4 lectures)  
Linear Decision boundaries, Discriminant Analysis, and Subspace Represen tation (PCA) (4 lectures)  
Unsupervised Learning: K -means and Graph -based Clustering (3 lectures)  
Time series: Introduction to Time Series and Stochastic Processes, HMM (3)  
Artificial Neural Networks, Autoencoder, and CNN, Regularization Techniques (6 lectu res) 
 
 
Laboratory Classes  
Programming labs on Normalization, Visualization (Visualization Tools: regression plots, scatter plot, 
tableau), Distribution, Evaluation, Regressions, Decision Tree, Bayes, PCA, LDA, ANN, K -means, Graph -
based Clustering, HMM.  
 
Case Studi es from different departments  
BSB: Identification of protein secondary structure (helices, sheets, and coil), or functional categories 
representing binding sites, cleavage sites, or residues being posttranslationally modified using Neural 
network s.  
ME: Machine Learning for Predictive Maintenance, where sensed machine data can be used in learning 
whether routine maintenance of the machine is required or not: Classification problem  
Chemical Engg: Application of  ML to predict life cycle of Lithium Ion Battery. (Challenge: Even with the 
same chemistry and same operating conditions, there is considerable variability in the life cycle of the lithium 
ion battery.  
Materials: Finding unprecedentedly low -thermal -conductivity half -Heusler semiconductors vi a high -
throughput materials modelling,  
Civil Engg:  Applications in Transportation Systems, Environmental Pollution Prediction.  
 
Text Books  
Machine Learning, T. M. MITCHELL, McGraw Hill Education, 2017  
 
Reference Books  
1. Pattern Recognition an d Machine Learn ing, C. M. BISHOP, Springer -Verlag New York, 2006  
2. Pattern Classification, R. O. DUDA, P. E. HART, D. G. STORK, Wiley -Blackwell, 2000  
 
24 
 Online course Material  
1. Introduction to Machine Learning, NPTEL Course Material, Department Computer Science and 
Engineering, IIT Madras: http//nptel.ac.in/courses/106106139/  
2. Machine Learning, Stanford University: https:// see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 Title  Probability, Statistics & Stochastic Process  Number  MAL2XX0  
Department  Mathematics  L-T-P [C]  3-1-0 [4]  
Offered for  B.Tech BSBE, CSE, EE, DS&AI, CHE, CIE, ES  Type  Institute Core – 
Engineering (IE)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
1. Demonstrate the basic principles of probability theory and random variables.  
2. Demonstrate the use of various families of probability distributions to model various types of data.  
3. Introduce the concept of stochastic process and its application  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students will have the ability to:  
1. Understand probability theory and develop the mathematical foundation of random variables.  
2. Understand random sampling, theory of  estimation and testing of hypotheses.  
3. Understand the concept of stochastic processes and demonstrate the specific applications to Poisson and 
Gaussian processes.  
 
Content  
Probability Spaces and Random Variables [16 lectures]: Axioms of probability, condit ional probability, 
Independence, Bayes’ rule, Random variable, Some common discrete and continuous distributions, 
Distribution of Functions of Random Variable, Two and higher dimensional distributions, Functions of 
random variables, Conditional distributio ns, Laws of large numbers, Central limit theorem.  
Estimation and Test of Hypothesis [12 lectures]:  Parameter Estimation, Maximum Likelihood Estimator [4 
lecture], Confidence Interval [2 lecture], Hypothesis Testing [6 lecture].  
Stochastic Processes [14 Le ctures]: Definition of Stochastic process, Classification and properties of stochastic 
processes, Simple Markovian stochastic processes, Gaussian processes, Stationary processes, Discrete and 
continuous time Markov chains, ergodicity.  
 
Text Books  
1. Ross, S. M.,  (2010), A First Course in Probability, Pearson Prentice Hall  
2. Ross, S. M., (2012), Introduction to probability and statistics for engineers and scientists, Elsevier  
3. Castaneda, L.B., Arunachalam, V. and Dharmaraja, S., (2012), Introduction to Probabilit y and Stochastic 
Processes with Applications, John Wiley & Sons.  
4. Papoulis, A., (1991), Probability, Random Variables, and Stochastic Processes, McGraw -Hill.  
 
Referenc e Books  
Rohatgi, V. K. & Saleh, A.K.M.E., (2011), An Introduction to Probability and Statistics, Wiley  
Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002). Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning  
Ross M.S., (2008), Stochastic Processes, John Wiley and Sons.  
Hoel, P.G., Port, S.C.  & Stone, C.J. (1986) Introduction to Stochastic Processes, Houghton Mifflin C ompany  
 
Online course Material  
1. G. Srinivasan, IIT Madras, Introduction to probability and Statistics, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111/106/111106112/  
2. S. Dharmaraja, IIT Delhi, Introduction to Probability Theory and Stochastic Processes, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111/102/111102111/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
 Title  Signals and systems  Number  EE2XX0  
Department  Electrical Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-1-0 [4]  
Offered for  B.Tech  Type  Institute Core – 
Engineering (IE) 
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The Instructor would:  
1. Familiarize students with the fundamentals of continuous -time and discrete -time linear systems, and 
their response analysis  
2. Provide understanding frequency -domain transforms and their real -world applications  
3. Discuss the applications from the area of engineering and physics  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students will have the ability to:  
1. Compute the response and system functions of LTI systems in various domains  
2. Solve basic real -world interdisciplinary problems involving time -domain or frequency analysis of 
signals  
 
Content  
Signals and Systems (Continuous and Discrete Time) [10 lectures]:   
Description and Classification of signals, signal operations in time domain, Sampling, Description and 
Classificatio n of LTI System, Properties of LTI system,  Impulse response, Convolution and Correlation.  
Frequency Domain Representation of Signals [12 lectures]:   
Fourier series representation of periodic signals, convergence of Fourier Series & Gibbs phenomenon, 
Fourie r Transform, Fourier transform of periodic signals, properties of Fourier transform, Laplace 
Transform, Z -Transform, region of convergence & properties, Rational System functions, Inverse Laplace 
and Z -Transform of Rational Functions and applications.  
LTI systems [12 lectures] :   
Difference and differential equation representation, block diagram representation, Transfer function and 
convolution, poles and zeros, step response, Natural Response of 1st and 2nd Order Systems, Sinusoidal 
steady -state and Freque ncy Response.  
Applications: [8 lectures]:   
Applications from the area of condition monitoring, Predictive Operations and Maintenance, Process 
Control, ECG Signal Filtering and Denoising, Seismic Signal Processing, and few examples related to 2D,3D, 
and spe ech signal processing.  
 
Text Books  
Oppenheim, A. & Wilsky, A. S., Signals and Systems, 2nd Edition, Prentice -Hall  
 
Reference Books  
1. Lathi, B. P., (2009), Principles of Linear Systems and Signals, 2nd Edition, Oxford University Press  
2. Haykin, S. & Veen, B. V., (2008), Signals and Systems, 2nd Edition, Wiley  
3. Dutta Roy, S. C., Chandra, S., (2018), Circuits, Systems and Signal Processing: A Tutorials Approach, 1st 
Edition, Springer  
 
Online course Material  
1. Dutta Roy, S. C., Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Signals and Systems,  
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLC6210462711083C4  
2. Venkatesan, K. S., Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Signals and Systems, NPTEL , 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/104/117104074/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
 Title  Thermodynamics  Number  MEL2XX0  
Department  Mechanical Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-1-0 [4]  
Offered for  All B. Tech  Type  Institute Core – 
Engineering (IE)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
1. To understand thermodynamics laws and various thermodynamic processes  
2. To comprehend work producing and work consuming cycles  
3. To inculcate the importance of change of state responsible for  physical and chemical changes.  
4. To introduce broader aspects of thermodynamics across disciplines and applicability of laws of 
thermodynamics and entropy principle in the areas ranging from design of prime movers to design of 
algorithms.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Ability to effectively apply laws of thermodynamics in the practice of engineering.  
2. Capability to assess and quantify thermodynamic efficiencies using the second law of thermodynamics.  
3. Ability to conduct comprehensive and rigorous treatment of classical thermodynamics while retaining 
an engineering perspective Content  
 
Content  
Implication of Thermodynamics and its scope in various disciplines [2 Lectures]: Mechanical engineering 
applications, Computer science applications, Electrical Engineering applications, Biological science 
applications, Chemical engineering applications.  
Basic concepts [2 Lectures]: Thermodynamic system, Properties, State, Process, Thermodynamic equilibrium, 
Pressure measurement, Zeroth law, Temperature measurement.  
Concept o f energy and energy transfer [7 Lectures]: Work and Heat, Internal energy, First Law of 
Thermodynamics, Work transfer and its value for different processes, Heat transfer, state functions,  Equation 
of state for ideal and real gases, Gas mixtures; Differen tial form of First Law, First Law and various Processes.  
Thermodynamic properties of pure substance [4 Lectures]: Phase change process of pure substance and their 
property diagram, Use of steam table and Mollier diagram.  
Energy analysis of closed and open systems [8 Lectures]: First law analysis for closed systems, Steady flow 
energy equation, Flow processes, Throttling process, Joule -Thomson effect, Energy analysis of open systems, 
and Analysis of First law for unsteady flow.  
Second law of thermodynamics [ 4 Lectures]: Reversible and Irreversible processes, Kelvin -Planck and 
Clausius statement, Heat engines, Heat pumps, Carnot cycle.  
Entropy [9 Lectures]: Definitions of entropy, statistical definition of pressure, temperature, entropy, Change 
of entropy for various processes, machine learning and coding application examples, Equilibrium, 
Spontaneity relations for Entropy, Helmholtz free energy, Gibbs free energy.  
Thermodynamic property relations [3 Lectures]: Maxwell relations, Clausius -Clapeyron equation  
Exergy [3 Lectures]: Definition of exergy, second law efficiency, Irreversibility, Exergy balance.  
 
Text Books  
1. Moran, M. J. & Shapiro, H. N., (2011), Fundamentals of Engineering Thermodynamics, 7th Edition, Wiley.  
2. Cengel, Y. A. & Boles, M. A., (2010), Thermod ynamics: An Engineering Approach, McGraw Hill 
Education  
3. Sonntag, R. E. & Wylen, V., (1998), Fundamentals of Thermodynamics, Wiley  
4. Zemansky M., (2017), Heat and Thermodynamics, McGrawhill  
 
Online course Material  
Prof. Keith A. Nelson & Prof. Moungi Bawendi., Thermodynamics and Chemical Kinetics, MIT 
OpenCourseWare, Link: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/chemistry/5 -60-thermodynamics -kinetics -spring -
2008/  
 
 
 
 
28 
 Title  Introduction to Analytical 
Mechanics  Number  PHL2XXX  
Department  Physics  L-T-P [C]  3-0-2 [4]  
Offered for  B.Tech of all branches  Type  Program Linked Science 
(LS) 
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
Provide concepts and problem solving approach related to Newtonian and Lagrangian formulation in 
Mechanics.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:  
Solve problems in Newtonian,  Lagrangian and Hamilton formalism  
 
Content  
Introduction to Newtonian  and Lagrangian mechanics, constraints, D'Alembert's principle, Problems solving 
approach in Newtonian  and Lag rangian formalism (12 Lectures)  
Central force problem: The equation of motion, the equivalent one -dimensional problem, classification of 
orbits, Virial theorem, Differential equation for the orbit, inverse square law of force, scattering in the central 
force field. (10 Lectures)  
Variational Principles and Lagrange’s equations: calculus of variations, Hamilton's principle, derivation of 
Lagrange's equation from Hamilton's principle, its application, conservation and symmetry property. (8 
Lectures)  
Rigid body  motion: orthogonal transformation, the Eulerian angles, Euler’s theorem, infinitesimal rotation,  
Rodrigues formula,  quaternion, the heavy symmetrical top, Gyroscope, Foucault Pendulum ( 8 Lectures)  
Hamilton's equation of motion: Legendre transformations  and Hamilton's equation (4 Lectures)  
 
Text Books  
1. Simon, Keith. R., Mechanics Second Edition Addison -Wesley publication (1960).  
2. Analytical Mechanics, L. N. Hand and J. D. Finch Paperback (1998)  
 
Reference Books  
1. Goldstein, H., Classical Mechanics, Pearson  India Limited, New Delhi (2011).  
2. Landau, L.D. and Lifshitz, E.M., Mechanics, Pergamon Press, (1960)  
 
Online course Material  
Prof. Harbola. M. K. , Engineering Mechanics,  Indian Institute of Technology -Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115/104/115104094/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
 Title  Fluid Mechanics  Number  MEL2XX0/ CHL2XX0  
Department  Mechanical Engineering/  Chemical 
Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3–1–0[4] 
Offered for  B.Tech (ME, CH)  Type  Program Compulsory (PC)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The instructor will : 
1. To inculcate the fundamental laws governing fluid flow  
2. Help the students to understand the importance and application of fluid mechanics.  
3. To exemplify concepts of similarity and model testing  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1. Apply fundamental knowledge in modelling and analysis of fluid flow problems in engineering  
2. Interpret data from experiments of fluid flo ws and solve using differential equations and charts  
 
Contents  
Introduction [2 Lecture]: Definition and properties, continuum approach, types of fluids, basics of vector 
calculus and index notations.  
Fluid statics [4 Lectures]: Basic equations, Manometry,h ydrostatic force on submerged bodies, rigid body 
motion.  
Integral analysis of fluid flow [4 Lectures]:  Reynolds transport theorem, conservation equations.  
Differential analysis [5 Lectures]: Kinematics of fluids -Deformations in fluid particle, strain r ate, vorticity, 
stream function, potential function, streamlines, pathlines, streaklines, derivation of Navier -Stokes equations.  
Incompressible Inviscid flow [6 Lectures]: Euler’s equation, Bernoulli’s equation, elementary potential flows, 
superposition of  elementary flows. Vorticity and vortex flows  
Internal Incompressible Viscous flow [4 Lectures]:Hagen -Poiseuille and Couette flows,skin friction and loss 
coefficients, venturimeter, orifice meter and Pitot tube.  
External Incompressible Viscous flow [5 Lecture]: Boundary layer over flat plate, boundary layer thickness, 
Prandtl -boundary layer equations, momentum integral equation, adverse pressure gradient & separation, 
drag coefficients.  
Dimensional analysis and similarity [2 Lectures]: Buckingham Pi theorem and examples.  
Introduction to Turbulent flows [3 Lectures]: Decomposition of instantaneous velocities, time -averaged 
continuity and Navier -Stokes equations, Reynolds stresses, turbulent viscosity.  
Basics of C ompressible flow [3 Lectures]: Acoustic waves, isentropic equations, concept of shock waves  
Few Industrial Applications [4 Lectures]: Pipe networks, Flow past immersed objects, Agitation and Mixing.  
 
Text Book  
1. Fox, R. W., Pitchard, P. J and McDonald, A. T., (2010), Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, 7thEdition, John 
Wiley & Sons Inc.  
2. Munson, B. R., Rothmayer, A. P., Okiishi, T’H., and Huebsch, W. W. Fundamentals of Fluid Mechanics, 
7th Edition, John Wiley and Sons  
3. Kundu, P. K, Cohen, I. M and Dowling, D. R,  Fluid Mechanics, 6th Edn., Associated Press.  
4. McCabe, W.L., Smith, J.C., Harriott, P., (2005), Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering, 7th edition, 
McGraw -Hill International edition.  
  
Reference Books  
1. White, F. M.,(2003), Fluid Mechanics, 5thEdition,  McG raw-Hil 
2. Cimbala, J.M. and Cengel, Y.A., (2010),Fluid Mechanics: Fundamentals and Applications, McGraw -Hill  
3. Bird. R. B., Stewart, W. E. and Lightfoot, E. N., 2006, Transport Phenomena, 2nd edition, John Wiley & 
Sons.  
4. Panton, Ronald L - Incompressible flow,  John Wiley & Sons, 2006. Third edition is available from Wiley 
Student Edition  
 
Self-Learning Material  
S. Chakrabarty, Introduction to Fluid Mechanics,  NPTEL Course Material, Mechanical Engineering, IIT 
Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/105/112105269/  
30 
 V.Shankar, Fluid Mechanics,  NPTEL Course Material, Chemical Engineering, IIT Kanpur,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/104/103104044/#  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
 Title  Fluid Mechanics Lab  Number  MEP3XX0  
Department  Mechanical Engineering  L-T-P [C]  0–0–2[1] 
Offered for  B. Tech (ME)  Type  Program Compulsory (PC)  
Prerequisite  Fluid Mechanics    
Objectives  
The instructor will  
1. To introduce various forms of flow measuring devices and techniques  
2. To provide hands on experience on in the area of experimental fluid mechanics  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students will have:  
1. Ability to design experimental methods for fluid flow problems  
2. Ability to interpret data from experiments of fluid flows and usage of charts and hand books  
 
Contents  
Determination of head loss in pipes having different diameters, different materials and di fferent roughness  
Determination of pressure drop at different types of bends and valves  
Reynolds apparatus to measure critical Reynolds number for pipe flows  
Measurement of Cp distribution on a cylinder  
Make survey experiments in a flow over a cylinder  
Impacts of jets on flat and curved plates  
Wind tunnel calibration using Pitot static tube  
Working principle of different flow meters (orifice plate, venture meter, turbine, Rota meter, electromagnetic 
flow meter)  
Effect of change in cross section and appl ication of the Bernoulli equation  
Flow measurement around an object or blockage using PIV technique  
Class projects for designing and measurement of simple fluid mechanics experiments  
 
Reference Books  
1. Fox,  R.  W.,  Pitchard,P.  J.,and McDonald,  A.  T., (2010), Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, 7thEdition, John 
Wiley & Sons Inc.  
2. Cimbala, J.M.,  Cengel, Y. A. (2010),Fluid Mechanics: Fundamentals and Applications, McGraw -Hill  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
 Title  Mechanics of Solids  Number  ME2XX0  
Department  Mechanical Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3–1–0 [4]  
Offered for  B.Tech  Type  Programme Compulsory 
(PC)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The instructor will : 
1. To inculcate fundamental concepts of stress, strain and deformation of solids  
2. Fundamental of applying equilibrium, compatibility and forced deformation relationships to structural 
elements  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Apply the fundamentals to analyze structural members  
2. Physical insight into distribution of stresses and strains in structural members  
3. Ability to design structural members using dimensions, force -displacement relationships, boundary 
conditions, loading and allowable stress  
 
Contents  
Stress and strain [10 Lectures]: Concept of stress at a point, Plane stress case: transformation of stresses at a 
poin t, principal stresses and Mohr's circle, Displacement field, Concept of strain at a point, Plane strain case: 
transformation of strain at a point, principal strains and Mohr's circle, Strain Rosette, Polar coordinates in 
stress and strain analysis. St. Ven ant’s principles and stress concentrations  
Mechanical behaviour [8 Lectures]: Concepts of elasticity, plasticity, strain hardening, failure 
(fracture/yielding), Generalized Hooke's law (without and with thermal strains) for isotropic materials, 
orthotropi c and anisotropic materials, Force displacement relationship and geometric compatibility for 
axially loaded members and thin walled pressure vessels  
Static Analysis[5 Lectures]: Complete equations of elasticity; Force analysis (axial force, shear force, be nding 
moment, and twisting moment diagrams) of slender members  
Elastic Bending[5 Lectures]: Moment curvature relationship for pure bending of beams with symmetric cross 
section, bending stress, shear stress; Cases of combined stresses, Deflection due to be nding, Integration of the 
moment curvature relationship for simple boundary conditions, Stress concentrations   
Elastic torsion[5 Lectures]: Torsion of circular shafts and thin walled tubes, Stress concentrations  
Strain Energy[5 Lectures]: Concept of stra in energy, strain energy for simple structural elements, Castigliano's 
theorems for deflection analysis and indeterminate problems;  
Elastic Buckling [4 Lectures]: Concept of elastic instability, Introduction to column buckling, Euler's formula  
 
Text Book s 
1. Crandall, S.H., Dahl, N.C., and Lardner, T. J., (1978), An Introduction to the Mechanics of Solids, McGraw 
Hill, Second Ed. with SI Units.  
2. Beer, F.P, Johnston, E.R. and De Wolf, J.T., (2004), Mechanics of Materials, Tata McGrawHill.  
3. Popov, E.P. , (1990),Engineering Mechanics of Solids, First Ed. Prentice Hall  
4. Meriam, J.L. and Kraige, L.G., (1980), Engineering Mechanics, Vol. 1: Statics, 2nd Ed. John Wiley  
5. Timoshenko, S.P. and Goodier, J.N. ``Theory of Elasticity``, McGraw -Hill, Internationa l Edition, 1970.  
 
Self Learning Materials  
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/106/105106116/  
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/102/105102090/  
3. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/104/105104160/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
 Title  Geoinformatics  Number  CI2XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B. Tech  Type  Program Core (PC)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The instructor will : 
1. To introduce the basic principles of photogrammetry, remote sensing, GPS and GIS.  
2. To teach application of geo -informatics in geoscience, ecology and environment study, agriculture, and 
disaster management.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
A graduate of this course will have a thorough idea of:  
1. Stereoscopic vision and principles.  
2. Multispectral, thermal infrared, and microwave remote sensing.  
3. Different map  projections and use of GPS.  
4. Component GIS and applications.  
5. Different cartographic models, implementation, validation, and visualization..  
 
Content  
Module I: Photogrammetry (Lectures: 10)  
Aerial Photographs and Photography: Types of photographs; Geometry;  Image displacement; Comparison 
of aerial photographs and map; Planning of photographic flights; Execution of flights; Aerial cameras. Use of 
Drones  
Stereoscopic Vision: Binocular observations; Separation of stereoscopic pair; Types of stereoscope; 
Measure ment of height from photographs; Stereo model; Model deformation.  
Radio Line Methods and Map Compilations: Graphical Radial Triangulation; Mechanical Radial 
Triangulation; Map compilations by graphical methods. Radial line plotter. Accuracy of radial lime methods.   
Aerial Mosaics: Planning for Mosaics; Mosaic compilation; Annotation and reproduction; Choice of methods.  
 
Module II: Remote Sensing (Lectures: 12)  
Basic Concepts: Interaction of EMR with atmosphere; Interaction of EMR with Earth’s surface; Sens ors; 
Platforms.  
Remote Sensing in Thermal Infrared Region: Emissivity; Thermal Infrared Sensors; Characteristics of thermal 
images; Applications.  
Remote Sensing in Microwave Region and Lidar: Passive systems; Active systems; SAR image characteristics; 
SAR image interpretation; Lidar.  
Multispectral and Hyperspectral Remote Sensing: Basics of multispectral and hyperspectral imaging  
Satellite Remote Sensing: Landsat; IRS and other satellites; Visual interpretation; Applications of satellite 
imagery.  
 
Module II I: Global Positioning System (Lectures: 10)  
Map: Map numbering; Rectangular grid system; Classification of map projections; Some useful projections; 
Georeferencing.  
Global Positioning System: Components of GPS; Operational principle; Facts and limitations of GPS; GPS 
receivers; Differential GPS concepts; Types of differential GPS; Areas of application  
 
Module IV: Geographical Information System (Lectures: 10)  
Geographical Information System: GIS concepts; components; Spatial Data Representation; Relationships of 
spatial objects; GIS functions; Remote sensing and GIS; GIS applications and status in India.  
Cartographic Modelling: Cartographic models; Inductive and deductive modelling; Model flowcharting; 
Conflict resolution; Verification and impleme ntation.  
Cartography and Visualization: Cartographic output; Thematic maps and cartograms; Multivariate Display; 
Web mapping and visualization; Virtual and immersion environments; Mapping the temporal dimension.  
Applications:Environment; Agriculture; Publi c Health; Water Resources Engineering; Transportation 
Engineering; Disaster Management.  
 
Text Books  
34 
 1. G. S. Srivastava (2014) An Introduction to Geoinformatics. McGraw Hill Education (India) Private 
Limited. New Delhi. India. ISBN: 9781259058462.  
2. Michael N.  DeMers (2008) Fundamentals of Geographic Information Systems (4th Ed). Wiley. ISBN: 978 -
0-470-12906 -7. 
3. T. M. Lillesand, R. W. Kiefer, J. W. Chipman (2004) Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation (5th Ed). 
Wiley. ISBN: 0 -471-15227 -7 
 
Other Books  
1. L. E. John son (2009) Geographic Information Systems in Water Resources Engineering. CRC Press. Taylor 
& Francis Group. ISBN 978 ‑1‑4200‑6913‑6. 
2. B. Tomaszewski (2015) Geographic Information Systems (GIS) for Disaster Management. CRC Press. 
Taylor & Francis Group. ISBN -13: 978 -1-4822 -1169 -6. 
3. Myer Kutz (Ed.) (2004) Gary S. Spring. Applications of GIS In Transportation. In book: Handbook of 
Transportation. McGraw -Hill Handbooks.  
 
Online course Material  
1. Prof. Arun K. Saraf (2016) Introduction to Geographic Information System. NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/107/105107155/  
2. Prof. Arun K. Saraf (2017) Introduction to Remote Sensing. NPT EL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/121/107/121107009/  
3. Prof. Rishikesh Bharti (2019) Remote Sensing and GIS. NPTEL. 
https://npte l.ac.in/courses/105/103/105103193/   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 Title  Geotechnical Engineering  Number  CI2XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech [CIE]  Type  Program 
Compulsory (PC)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The instructor will : 
1. Introducing basic principles of soil mechanics and foundation design.  
2. Introducing the testing techniques to determine the engineering properties of soil.  
3. Introducing design principles of foundations for structures.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to  
1. Interpret various engineering properties of soil and choose appropriate strength properties for design.  
2. Evaluate the stresses on soils and foundations and provide subsequent design solutions  
3. Design shallow and deep foundations for traditional structures  
4. Assess the stability of retaining walls under different loading conditions.  
5. Apply the soil exploration techniques to prepare subsoil profiles  
 
Contents  
Module 1[Lectures: 10]  
Introduction, origin of soils, index properties, soil structure and clay mineralogy,basic geotechnical 
definitions and relationships, laboratory tests, soil classifications,effective stress, capillarity and permeability: 
Principle of effective stress; Darcy's Law; permeability; c oefficient of permeability; permeability of layered 
systems  
 
Module 2 [Lectures: 6]  
Seepage through soils, vertical stresses, flow nets, quick sand condition; stresses induced by applied loads, 
Boussinesq’s and Westergaard’s theories for point loads and ar eas of different shapes, Newmark’s influence 
chart, compaction, laboratory tests  
 
Module 3 [Lectures: 10]  
Consolidation, stress history of soil, spring Analogy –Terzaghi’s one dimensional consolidation theory, 
determination of coefficient of consolidation,  shear strength of soils, Mohr – Coulomb failure theories, shear 
strength determination, critical Void Ratio, liquefaction introduction  
 
Module 4[Lectures: 6]  
Slope stability, infinite slopes and translational slides, finite slopes, forms of slip surface, total stress and 
Effective stress methods of analysis, earth pressure and retaining structures, earth pressure theories  
 
Module 5[Lectures: 10]  
Shallow foundations, bearing capacity, factors influencing bearing capacity,analytical methods to determine 
bear ing capacity, Terzaghi’s theory –IS Methods,plate load test, types of foundation settlements, deep 
foundations, load carrying capacity of piles, pile load tests, settlement of pile groups, well 
foundations,components of well; forces acting on well foundati ons; construction and sinking of wells; tilt and 
shift  
 
Text Books  
1. Bowles J.E. (1997). Foundation Analysis and Design (5th Ed). Tata McGraw -Hill International Edition. 
ISBN 0 -07-912247 -7. 
2. Budhu. M (2012). Soil Mechanics and Foundations (3rd Ed). John Wiley  and Sons. ISBN: 978 -0-470-55684 -
9. 
3. Robert W. day (2010). Foundation Engineering Handbook (2nd Ed). McGraw -Hill Professional. ISBN 978 -
0-07-174010 -4 
Additional references  
Foundation Engineering (2018) by Prof. Kousik Deb on NPTEL. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105176/  
 
36 
 Title  Geotechnical Engineering 
Laboratory  Number  CI2XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering  L-T-P [C]  0-0-3 [1.5]  
Offered for  B.Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Compulsory (PC)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The instructor will : 
1. Familiarizing students with the physical and engineering properties of soil.  
2. Introducing the laboratory testing equipment and their functioning principles  
3. Introducing basic field soil testing techniques  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to : 
1. Classify the soils roughly based on visual identification  
2. Determine the index and engineering properties of soils  
3. Use simple and complex field and laboratory testing techniques to determine the shear str ength of soils  
 
Contents  
Experiments  
Visual classification of soils  
Specific gravity and moisture content determination  
Dry and wet sieve analysis of soils  
Sedimentation analysis: Hydrometer analysis  
Atterberg limits: liquid limit; plastic limit and sh rinkage limit  
Permeability of soils through constant head and falling head tests  
Field unit weight through sand replacement and core cutter tests  
Laboratory compaction: light weight and heavy weight  
Consolidation of soil  
Direct shear test for sands  
Unconfined compression test on cohesive specimens  
Triaxial compression test: Unconsolidated undrained; consolidated undrained  
Vane shear test  
Standard penetration test and other miscellaneous field tests  
 
Text Books  
1. Das B.M. (2009). Soil mechanics laboratory manual (7th Ed). OUP USA International Edition. ISBN 10 -
0195367596.  
2. Fratta D. Aguettant J. Smith L.R. (2007). Introduction to Soil Mechanics Laboratory Testing. CRC Press -
Taylor & Francis Group (1st Ed). ISBN -10: 1138430242  
3. Budhu. M (2012). Soil  Mechanics and Foundations (3rd Ed). John Wiley and Sons. ISBN: 978 -0-470-55684 -
9. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37 
 Title  Environmental Engineering  Number  CI2XX0  
Department  Civil and In Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-2 [4]  
Offered for  B. Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Compulsory 
(PC)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The instructor will : 
1. To gain understanding of the basic concept of air pollution, its sources, and pollutant transport and 
dispersion.  
2. To develop understanding of the concepts and strategies for control of particulate matter and gas -phase 
pollutants.  
3. To develop understanding of water quality, water supply systems and wastewater treatment systems.  
4. To develop a basic understanding of the l ife cycle of waste generation to disposal.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. The students are expected to achieve proficiency in:  
2. Developing a broad overview of various unit operations involved in water treatment and design.  
3. Understanding and solving problems related t o pollutant dispersion as well as identifying the right 
control techniques/measures to meet the desired standard levels.  
4. Develop understanding of collection, transfer, treatment, management and disposal of solid waste.  
 
Contents  
Module I: Wastewater Treat ment [Lectures 14].  
Sources, nature and characteristics, generation and collection of wastewater, sanitary, storm and combined 
sewage systems design and flows; primary treatment methods (screening, grit removal, sedimentation and 
coagulation); secondary tr eatment methods (attached and suspended growth systems, biomass growth and 
yield, BOD kinetics); Aerobic and anaerobic processes,; Nitrification -denitrification systems; Sludge 
characteristics, thickening and disposal  
 
Module II: Air pollution [Lectures 1 4] 
 Sources, types and classification of air pollutants, air pollution episodes, effect of air pollutants on human 
health, vegetation and materials, air quality and emission standards, air pollution legislation, effect of 
meteorology: Lapse rate, Atmospher ic Stability, Plume behavior and dispersion, Stack height; Methods for 
pollutant monitoring and control, design and selection of control equipments, engineering emission control 
concepts, pollutant removal and disposal, source control technologies, Indoor air pollution sources and 
control.  
 
Module III: Solid Waste Management [Lectures 14]  
Fundamentals of Solid Waste Management, Management of solid waste, Hazardous Waste Management: 
Fundamentals, Radioactive Waste Management: Fundamentals, Environmental Risk  Assessment, 
Physicochemical Treatment of Solid and Hazardous Waste, Biological Treatment of Solid and Hazardous 
Waste, Incineration, Landfill Design. E -Waste Management.  
 
Laboratory  
Introduction to laboratory and preliminary examination of water (color, odor and taste)  
Determination of pH, alkalinity, turbidity and optimum coagulant dose, and conductivity  
Determination of solids (total, dissolved, organic, inorganic and settleable) and hardness  
Determination of chloride, sulphates and sulfide in water  
Determination of iron and manganese in water  
Determination of DO and BOD in wastewater  
Determination of phosphorus and fluoride in water  
Determination of free and combined residual chlorine in water  
Determination of coliforms in water  
Demonstration of Analyt ical Instruments: water –related  
Demonstration of Air Sampling Devices and Weather Monitoring Station  
 
Text Books  
38 
 1. Stull, R. “Practical Meteorology: An algebra -based survey of atmospheric science” – version 1.02b. Univ. 
of British Columbia. 2017.  
2. Aerosol Mea surement: Principles, Techniques and Applications, edited by K. Willeke, P. Baron, Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, 1993.  
3. Burton F.L., Tchobanoglous G., Stensel H.D., 2017, WasteWater Engineering Treatment and Reuse, 
4thed.,Tata McGraw -Hill.  
4. Arceivala S.J. and Asole kar S.R., 2007, Wastewater Treatment for Pollution Control and Reuse, 3rd Ed., 
Tata McGraw Hill.  
5. George Tchobanoglous, Hilary Theisen, Samuel Vigil, Integrated Solid Waste Management: Engineering 
Principles and Management Issues, McGraw -Hill Series in Wate r Resources and Environmental 
Engineering, ISBN -10: 0070632375, ISBN -13: 978 -0070632370  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
 Title  Smart Infrastructure Engineering  Number  CI2XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  B.Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Compulsory (PC)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The instructor will : 
1. Understanding the integration of digital technology in infrastructure systems  
2. Designing a smart infrastructure system at various scales  
 
Learning Outcomes  
At the end of the course, students will be able to : 
1. Realize and integrate various elements of smart infrastructure systems  
2. Instrument, monitor and analyze a physical entity for effective decision making  
3. Design, develop and manage smart i nfrastructure systems  
 
Contents  
Module 1: Introduction to Infrastructure [Lectures: 6]  
Examples of infrastructure systems: Water supply and distribution, Transport systems, Energy management, 
Building infrastructure, Waste Management. Need for making these  infrastructures smart.  
 
Module 2: Data Acquisition [Lectures: 8]  
Sensors for different applications – Basic Principles and interpretation of their outputs; Sensors – Inertial 
Sensors, Fibre Optic Sensing, Optical Sensors including 2D and 3D Camera. Use of  satellite images and 
Drones for sensing. IOT, Networking, Fog and Cloud for data acquisition. Sensor placement. Case studies for 
selected infrastructures.  
 
Module 3: Analysis of Data [Lectures: 12]  
Review of data processing for interpretation and decision -making using machine learning and AI; machine 
learning and AI applications in transportation problems (e.g. planning public transport, road traffic 
prediction, traffic incident detection) and environmental (e.g. air pollution management), Application of 
machine learning in water distribution networks (monitoring, alarm generation, urban water resource 
management). AI for Building Management; Use of ML for structural health management.  
 
Module 4: Control Applications in Infrastructure [Lectures: 10]  
Introdu ction to basics of control systems including feedback control; feedback control in the field of structural 
dynamics (tool to protect bridges, buildings against wind, earthquake, etc.), life -cycle management of 
infrastructure; introduction to pollution cont rol systems.  
 
Module 5: Design for adaptability [Lectures: 6]  
Design of smart infrastructure with adaptive capabilities; Design of smart city considering infrastructures of 
energy, mobility, health and sustainability and their growing interdependencies.  
 
Text Books  
1. Raj, P., & Raman, A. C. (2015). Intelligent Cities: Enabling Tools and Technology. CRC Press.  
2. Meneguette, R. I., De Grande, R. E., & Loureiro, A. A. (2018). Intelligent transport system in smart cities. 
Springer: Cham, Switzerland.  
3. Deakin, Mark; Al Waer, Husam (Eds.) (2012), From Intelligent to Smart Cities, Routledge, Taylor & 
Francis, USA and Canada  
4. Song, H., Srinivasan, R., Sookoor, T., & Jeschke, S. (2017). Smart cities: foundations, principles, and 
applications. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978111 9226390  
 
Additional References  
Berglund, E. Z., Monroe, J. G., Ahmed, I., Noghabaei, M., Do, J., Pesantez, J. E., ... & Levis, J. (2020). Smart 
Infrastructure: A Vision for the Role of the Civil Engineering Profession in Smart Cities. Journal of 
Infrastruc ture Systems, 26(2), 03120001.  
1. Haarstad, H. (2017). Constructing the sustainable city: Examining the role of sustainability in the ‘smart 
city’ discourse. Journal of Environmental Policy & Planning, 19(4), 423 -437. 
40 
 2. ASCE. (2017) Infrastructure Report Card: A comprehensive assessment of America’s infrastructure. 
Reston, VA: ASCE.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41 
 Title  Construction Technology and Practices  Number  CI2XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for  B. Tech [CIE]  Type  Program 
Compulsory (PC)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
1. To motivate students to learn and appreciate various components of a building, their functions, materials 
of constructions, and different stages of construction.  
2. To impact the basics of calculation of quantities and rates of construction works  
3. To introduce planning and scheduling of construction projects  
 
Learning Outcomes  
At the end of the course, the student should be able to:  
1. Assimilate properties of building materials  
2. Understand components of building construction such as foundation, floor, wall and roof.  
3. Assimilate quantity and quality of materials for building construction and prepare building estimate  
4. Create project schedule, bar charts, and critical path n etworks  
 
Contents  
Module I: Construction materials [Lectures -10]: 
Properties and uses of common types of stones, bricks, tiles and hollow building blocks, Pozzolanic Material, 
Cement, lime and mortar, Properties, types and applications of other building ma terials like timber, 
protective coverings [Paints and varnishes], rubber, bitumen, tar and asphalt, glass, plastics and polymers, 
refractory materials etc, Introduction to concrete mix design  
 
Module II: Building construction[Lectures – 10]: 
Building const ruction: Components of building, shallow and deep foundations; Stone and brick masonry, 
type of bonds, load bearing walls, cavity wall, partition walls, finishing/coating materials for 
roofs/floors/walls, construction and expansion joints; Introduction to Green building and LEED 
classifications.  
 
Module III: Building Estimates [Lectures – 10]: 
Types and methods, Detailed specifications for common building materials, Preparation of detailed estimates 
for RCC single storey building, Calculation of quantities of materials and analysis of rates.  
 
Module IV: Introduction to Project Planning and Network Analysis [Lectures -12] 
Introduction to Scheduling, Controlling, Methods of Planning and Programming, Network - Graphical 
Presentation and guidelines  
 
Constructio n materials laboratory  
Cement:  
Consistency and setting time   
Soundness test  
Blaine’s air permeability test  
Specific gravity  
Compressive strength of hydraulic cement  
 
Aggregate:  
Specific gravity and water absorption of coarse aggregate  
Bulk density  
Specific gravity and water absorption of fine aggregate  
Particle size distribution  
Aggregate crushing strength test.   
Los Angeles Abrasion test.  
Aggregate impact test.  
Flakiness index and Elongation index test.  
 
42 
 Concrete:  
Concrete slump test  
7 day compr essive/split tensile/flexural strength  
Air content of concrete by pressure method  
Determination of unit weight of concrete  
 
Bitumen:  
Penetration test  
Ductility test  
Viscosity test  
Softening point test  
Flash and fire point test  
 
Miscellaneous test for pavem ents 
Determination of bitumen content by centrifuge extractor  
Determination of Marshall stability value  
Determination of rebound deflection of pavement by Benkelman beam  
 
Text Books  
1. Gambhir, M. L. and Neha Jamwal, Building Materials, Tata McGraw Hill.  
2. Huntington, W. C. Building Construction, John Wiley, New York  
3. Dutta, B. N. Estimating and Costing in Civil Engineering, Theory and Practice. UBS Publishers' 
Distributors Pvt Ltd.  
4. Srinath, L. S. An Introduction to Project Management, Tata McGraw Hill  
 
Additional References  
1. Rangwala, S. C. Engineering Materials, Charotar Publishing House, Anand  
2. Punmia, B., C. Building Construction, Laxmi Publications, New Delhi  
3. Shah, N. A. Quantity Surveying and Valuation. Khanna Publishers.  
4. Mazda, F. Engineering Managem ent, Adison Wesley, Longman Ltd.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 
 Title  Transportation Engineering  Number  CI2XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B. Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Compulsory (PC)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The course will introduce students to the planning, alignment, construction, and operation of highways and 
traffic flow analysis.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. At the end of the course, the student should be able to:  
2. Carry out surveys involved in planning and highway alignment  
3. Design cross section elements, sight distance, horizontal and vertical alignment  
4. Determine the characteristics of pavement materials  
5. Implement traffic studies, traffic regulations and controls, and intersection design  
 
Contents  
Module  I: Introduction to Transportation Engineering [Lectures -3]: 
Transportation system; Introduction to Highway Engineering; Road classification, Terrain classification, 
Factors affecting transportation  
 
Module II: Transportation Planning [Lectures – 10] 
Urban  Transportation Planning - Comprehensive planning, System Engineering process; Zoning for 
Transportation surveys/data collection; Four -step transportation planning -Trip generation, Trip 
distribution, Modal split, Route assignment.  
 
Module III: Geometric des ign [Lectures – 10]: 
Highway classification; Factors affecting geometric design; Highway design process -Highway cross sectional 
elements, Sight distance, Highway alignment: Horizontal alignment -horizontal curve, Super elevation, extra 
widening, Transition  curve, Setback distance, Visibility, Vertical alignment -gradient, grade compensation, 
summit curve, valley curve.  
 
Module IV: Pavement Engineering [Lectures -10] 
Pavement characteristics, materials, Types of pavement - Flexible and Rigid pavements, Wheel  load 
calculations, Flexible Pavement materials - soil, aggregate, bitumen; Tests on pavement materials; Bituminous 
mix design, Marshall stability; Rigid pavement - joints, analysis of stresses; IRC method for design of flexible 
and rigid pavement; Pavement failures.  
 
Module V: Traffic Engineering [Lectures -9] 
Transportation system, Factors affecting traffic performance, Micro and macro elements of traffic flow, 
fundamental diagram of traffic flow, Introduction to traffic signs and signals  
 
Text Books  
1. N. J. Garber, L.A. Hoel. Traffic and Highway Engineering, 4th Edition  
2. Saxena S. C.  Textbook of Highway and Traffic Engineering, CBS Publishers.  
3. Wright Dixon, Highway Engineering, Wiley India.  
 
Additional References  
1. S. K. Khanna, C. E. G. Justo, and A. Veeraraga van. Highway Engineering, Nem Chand and Bros. 
Publishers.  
2. I.S. specifications on concrete, aggregates and bituminous materials.  
3. David Croney, Design and performance of road pavements, McGraw Hill  
4. Dr. L. R. Kadiyali, Traffic Engineering and Transport Planni ng, Khanna Publishers.  
5. James H. Banks, Introduction to Transportation Engineering, McGraw Hill  
6. R. Srinivasa Kumar, Textbook of Highway Engineering, University Press  
7. IRC: SP:21 -2009. Guidelines on landscaping and tree plantation.  
8. R. P. Roess, E.S. Prassas, W.R. McShane. Traffic Engineering, 4th edition, Pearson.  
44 
 9. Chakroborty, P., Animesh Das. Principles of Transportation Engineering. Second Edition, PHI Learning 
Private Limited  
10. Samuel Morgan. Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning. Williford Pr.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 Title  Water Resources Engineering  Number  CI2XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-2 [4]  
Offered for  B. Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Compulsory 
(PC)  
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
In this course the students will:  
1. Learn to describe the fundamental concepts of hydrology  
2. Understand various methods of hydrologic analysis  
3. Apply various hydrologic and hydraulic analysis methods to design stormwater drains, dams, irrigation 
and diversion  structures  
 
Learning Outcomes  
At the end of the course, the student should be able to:  
1. Conceptualize different hydrologic process based on physical laws  
2. Apply the concept of flood and reservoir routing in real data and solve the field issues  
3. Find solution s for water resources issues such as urban flooding, water management and groundwater 
depletion.  
 
Contents  
MODULE I: [No. of lectures – 11] 
Introduction: Hydraulic cycle, Precipitation: forms, classification, variability, measurement, data analysis. 
Evapotranspiration: Penman -Monteith and other methods, Infiltration: factors affecting, estimation by NRCS, 
Green -Ampt methods  
 
MODULE II: [No. of lectures -10] 
Runoff: Drainage basin characteristics, hydrographs, concepts, assumptions and limitations of un it 
hydrograph, derivation of unit hydrograph, flow duration curve, rainfall -runoff modelling Hydraulic 
analysis and design: Design flood estimation, frequency analysis, flood routing, storm drainage design; Flood 
management: Flood mitigation, flood damage analysis  
 
MODULE III: [No. of lectures -10]  
Dams: types, forces, failure types and causes; design of gravity dams. Reservoirs: safe yield, capacity design, 
reliability, design of overflow spillway; Hydroelectric power: Low, medium and high head plants, 
powerhouse components, microhydel  
 
MODULE IV: [No. of lectures -11] 
Role of economics in water resources planning: Multipurpose projects, issues in water resources planning 
and development, system techniques, risk analysis Irrigation: Irrigation water requi rement computation, 
diversion structures, cross drainage structures, regulation structures, filed irrigation methods Groundwater: 
Occurrence, hydraulics of wells, yield, artificial recharge  
 
Irrigation Engineering Design Laboratory:  
Design of Irrigation C anal [lined and unlined]  
Design of canal outlets  
Design of Alluvial channels carrying clear and sediment laden water  
Design the section of hydraulic jump  
Design of cross drainage structures with typical plan and section  
Design of profile of ogee spillw ay  
Design of Trapezoidal Notch Fall, SARDA fall and Glacis Fall  
Design of Cisterns  
Analysis and Design of gravity dam  
Analysis and Design of earth embankment dam  
Problems related to energy dissipators  
 
Text Books  
1. Mays, L.W. Water Resources Engineering , John Wiley and sons, Inc., Kundli  
46 
 2. Todd, D. K. and Mays, L. W. Ground Water Hydrology, John Wiley India Edition  
 
Additional Ref erences  
1. Chow, V.T., Maidment, D.R., and Mays L.W. Applied Hydrology. McGraw -Hill Inc., New York.  
2. James, L.D., and Lee, R.R. Economics of water resources planning. McGraw -Hill Book Inc., New York.  
3. Garg, S.K. Irrigation Engineering and Hydraulic Structures. Khanna Publishers, Delhi.  
4. Linsley, R.K., Franzini, J.B., Freyberg, D.L., and Tchobanoglous, G. Water Resources Engineering, McGraw 
Hill Inc., Singapore.  
5. Singh, V.P. Elementary Hydrology. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47 
 Title  Structural Analysis  Number  CI2XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-2 [4]  
Offered for  B.Tech. [CIE]  Type  PC 
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
This course aims at:  
1. Introduction to fundamental concepts of structural analysis.  
2. Development of analytical skills to compute quantities like displacements, stresses etc. in structures 
subjected to static forces.  
3. Analytical and numerical methods as well as procedures in a way that emphasize physical insight.  
4. Problem solving ability for static loads in Civil Engineering design of structures.  
  
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to:  
1. Establish equilibrium equations of structural systems.  
2. Analyze the responses and stresses generated in structures subjected to different types of static loading.  
3. Apply the structural analysis methods to solve real -world problems of the  building, bridges etc.  
 
Contents  
Module 1  
Analysis of statically determinate structures: Determination of internal force on a system; internal forces 
acting on typical structural members - axial force, shear force and bending moment; discussion on sign 
convention and notations for internal forces; obtaining internal forces in a system - general procedure; 
internal force diagrams for various systems;  analysis of pin jointed determinate truss. (Lectures: 8)  
Module 2  
Determination of slope and deflection of b eams: Solving differential equation of the elastic curve, slope and 
deflection of beams by method of successive integration; Macaulay’s method; moment area method; 
conjugate beam method; principle of virtual work; strain energy method; bending deflection d ue to 
temperature variation; Maxwell -Betti law of reciprocal deflections. (Lectures: 9)  
Module 3  
Force method: Introduction and applications of analysis of statically indeterminate beams - the force method; 
analysis of statically indeterminate structures b y energy method; three moment equation for shear force, 
bending moment diagrams, deflection and support settlement. (Lectures: 10)  
Module 4  
Moving loads and influence lines: Introduction to variable loading, construction of influence lines using 
equilibriu m method, use of influence lines for reaction, shear force and bending moment in simply supported 
beams; influence lines for forces in trusses; analysis for different types of moving loads - concentrated loads, 
uniformly distributed load etc. (Lectures: 7)  
Module 5  
Cables, suspension bridges and arches: Analysis of forces in cables, suspension bridges with three -hinged 
and two -hinged stiffening girders; theory of arches; Eddy’s theorem; analysis of three -hinged and two -hinged 
arches; settlement and temperat ure effects. (Lectures: 8)  
 
Text Books  
1. C. K Wang (2010) Intermediate Structural Analysis (1st Ed), Tata McGraw Hill. ISBN 9780070702493.  
2. S. Timoshenko, D.H. Young, J.V. Rao, S. Patil (2013) Engineering Mechanics (In SI Units) (5th Ed), Tata 
McGraw -Hill Education Pvt. Ltd. ISBN 9781259062667.  
3. R.C. Hibbeler (2018) Structural Analysis (10th Ed), Pearson Education. ISBN 9780134610672.  
4. D. Menon (2018) Structural Analysis (2nd Ed), Narosa Publications. ISBN 9788184875973.  
 
Additional References  
Structural Anal ysis I (2009) by Prof. Siddhartha Ghosh and Prof. R.S. Jangid on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/101/105101085/  
 
Laboratory  
Verification of moment area theorem for the slope and defl ection of beam.  
Verification of Clerk -Maxwell’s reciprocal theorem.  
48 
 Experimentally determining the elastic properties of an elastic beam.  
Experimental and analytical study of defections in a cantilever beam.  
To study the behaviour of struts and columns wit h various support end conditions.  
Determination of the deflection of a pin connected truss through analytical, graphically and experimental 
calculations.  
Determine the horizontal thrust in a three hinged arch for a given system of loads experimentally and verify 
it with theoretical calculations.  
Experimental and analytical study of sway in portal frame.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49 
 Title  Reinforced Concrete Design  Number  CI2XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-2 [4]  
Offered for  B.Tech. [CIE  Type  Program Core (PC)  
Prerequisite  Structural Analysis    
Objectives  
This course aims at:  
1. Providing an in -depth knowledge on the behaviour of RCC structures.  
2. Highlighting the significance of working stress and limit state design methods.  
3. Comprehensive development of the design and reinforcement detailing of beams, columns, slabs, 
staircases, footings.  
4. Develop an understanding with respect to the importance of  stiffness, strength, ductility and 
configuration which is useful for earthquake resistant design.  
5. Practicing reinforcement detailing procedures of a RCC building considering wind and seismic forces as 
per Indian Standard codes and developing design skill s.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to:  
1. Assess the behaviour of RCC structures and apply the appropriate design methodology and 
reinforcement detailing for different types of RCC structural elements i.e. beams, columns, slabs, 
staircases, foundations etc.  
2. Design and provide reinforcement detail ing of multistoried RCC buildings considering dead, wind and 
seismic forces as per Indian Standard codes.  
 
Contents  
Module 1(Lectures: 10)  
Introduction to reinforced concrete structures: Properties of concrete; codes of practices; design philosophy 
of rei nforced concrete structures - working stress and limit state design methods.  
Design of RCC beams: Singly and doubly reinforced rectangular/flanged sections; design for shear, torsion, 
bond and anchorage of reinforcement; design of continuous beams.  
 
Modul e 2(Lectures: 8)  
Design of Slabs: One -way and two -way slabs; design of slabs for serviceability; design of continuous slab 
systems.  
Design of RCC staircase.  
 
Module 3(Lectures: 8)  
Design of RCC columns: design of short columns under pure compression, uniax ial and biaxial bending; 
design of long columns.  
 
Module 4(Lectures: 8)  
Design of foundations: Isolated footings; combined and strip footing; raft foundation.  
Design of retaining walls.  
 
Module 5(Lectures: 8)  
Design of RCC structures considering wind and seismic forces: Concept of earthquake resistant design of 
RCC structures - design philosophy, stiffness, strength, ductility and configurations; estimation of wind and 
seismic forces as per IS codes; ductile design and detailing of RCC earthquake resistant  structures;  
Introduction to prestressed concrete.  
 
Text Books  
1. U.S. Pillai, D. Menon (2016) Reinforced Concrete Design (3rd Ed), Tata McGraw -Hill Publishing Co. Ltd. 
ISBN 9780070141100.  
2. S.N. Sinha (2014) Reinforced Concrete Design (3rd Ed) McGraw Hill Education Pvt. Ltd. ISBN 
9789351342472.  
3. A.K. Jain (2012) Reinforced Concrete - Limit State Design (7th Ed), NemChand Brothers. ISBN 
9788185240664  
50 
 4. P.C. Varghese (2010) Limit State Design of Reinforced Concrete (2nd Ed), Prentice Hall of India. ISBN 
81203203 95. 
5. S.K. Mallick, A.K. Gupta (2002) Reinforced Concrete (2nd Ed), Tata McGraw -Hill Publishing Co. Ltd. 
ISBN 0070473323.  
 
Additional References  
Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures (2009) by Dr. Nirjhar Dhang on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/105/105105105/  
 
Laboratory Contents  
Introduction of computer applications in the structural design.  
Design of beam (under -reinforced, balanced, over -reinforced,  doubly reinforced) using computer 
applications.  
Design and detailing of slabs (one -way and two -way), columns, walls, footing etc.  
Modelling, analysis and design of a multi -storeyed framed structure.  
Determination of the compressive strength of concrete.  
Strength and deflection testing of a simply supported RCC beam.  
Testing of RCC columns for strength subjected to concentric and eccentric loading conditions.  
Non -destructive testing – rebound hammer test for concrete, ultrasonic pulse velocity test for co ncrete, rebar 
detector test for reinforcement etc.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51 
 Title  Advanced Structural Analysis  Number  CI2XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-2 [4]  
Offered for  B.Tech. [CIE]  Type  PC 
Prerequisite  Structural Analysis    
Objectives  
This course aims at:  
1. Introduction to advanced concepts of structural analysis and review the concepts of solid mechanics.  
2. Further development of analytical skills to compute quantities like displacements, stresses etc. in different 
structures subjected to static forces.  
3. Analytical and numerical methods as well as procedures in a way that emphasize physical insight.  
4. Gaining the basic understanding of structural stability and dynamics response.  
5. Problem solvin g ability for static and dynamic loads in structural engineering.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to:  
1. Analyze statically indeterminate trusses, beams and frames.  
2. Understand the fundamentals of the matrix formulation of structural analysis through finite element 
method.  
3. Determine bending moment, shear forces and axial force in the rigid frames subjected to lateral and 
vertical loads.  
4. Determine the dynamic response of simple structure under free vibration.   
5. Perform comprehensive me thods of structural analysis on real -world problems of practical interest.  
6. Model real life structures for solving them in standard software and examine both local and global 
stability of the structural system.  
 
Contents  
Module 1  
Force method of analysis of  indeterminate structures: Fixed and continuous beams, frames etc. - analysis by 
consistent deformation method; application of moment area and conjugate beam methods for fixed beams; 
theorem of three moments for continuous beams. (Lectures: 5)  
Displacement  method of analysis of indeterminate structures:  Analysis of continuous beams, beams with 
overhang, rigid frames with sloping legs, settlement effects etc.; moment distribution method as successive 
approximation of slope deflection equations. (Lectures: 5)  
Module 2  
Stress and strain tensors: Generalized strain displacement relationship; compatibility condition and 
constitutive relationship; plane stress and plain strain problems; some boundary value problems in elasticity; 
yield criterion. (Lectures: 7)  
Plastic analysis: Introduction to plastic theory; concept of plastic hinge; plastic modulus; shape factor; 
redistribution of moments; collapse mechanism; plastic analysis of beams and portal frames by equilibrium 
and mechanism methods. (Lectures: 5)  
Module 3  
Introduction to FEM: Energy methods and variational principles; generation of stiffness matrix of 1D and 2D 
elements by FEM approach; use of virtual work method for generating stiffness matrix of structure; matrix 
formulation of structural analysis. (Lectu res: 6)  
Stability of structure: Concept of structural stability; classical stability analysis of beams and frames; energy 
method of the stability analysis of beams, frames and plates. (Lectures: 6)  
Module 4  
Introduction to structural dynamics: Basic concep ts of dynamic loading and response; types of mass -spring -
damper system; equation of motion using direct equilibration, Hamilton’s principle. (Lectures: 2)  
Single -degree of freedom system: Development of equation of motion; statement of problem and solution; 
damped and undamped systems; free vibration response. (Lectures: 6)  
 
Text Books  
1. C. K Wang (2010) Intermediate Structural Analysis (1st Ed), Tata McGraw Hill. ISBN 9780070702493.  
2. S. Timoshenko, D.H. Young, J.V. Rao, S. Patil (2013) Engineering Mec hanics (In SI Units) (5th Ed), Tata 
McGraw -Hill Education Pvt. Ltd. ISBN 9781259062667.  
3. R.C. Hibbeler (2018) Structural Analysis (10th Ed), Pearson Education. ISBN 9780134610672.  
52 
 4. D. Menon (2018) Structural Analysis (2nd Ed), Narosa Publications. ISBN 97881 84875973.  
5. J.B. Wilbur, C.H. Norris, S. Utku (2006) Elementary Structural Analysis, McGraw Hill, New York. ISBN 
9781258242909.  
6. A.K. Chopra (2017) Dynamics of Structures Theory and Application to Earthquake Engineering (5th Ed), 
Prentice Hall, NJ. ISBN 978 -0-134-55512 -6. 
 
Additional References  
Advanced Structural Analysis (2012) by Prof. Devdas Menon on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/106/105106050/   
 
Laboratory  
Introduction of computer  applications in structural analysis.  
Create and analyze models to determine the shear force, bending moment, deflection diagrams for statically 
indeterminate beams.  
Create and analyze models to determine the shear force, bending moment, deflection diagram s for portal 
frames.  
Create and analyze models to determine the shear force, bending moment, deflection diagrams for multi 
storeyed buildings.  
Determine shear force, bending moment, deflection diagrams for multi -storey frames using approximate 
methods.  
Mod elling and analysis of 3D structures.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53 
 Title  Steel Structure Design  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-1-0 [4]  
Offered for  B.Tech. [CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite  Structural Analysis    
Objectives  
This course aims at:  
1. Providing an in -depth knowledge on the behaviour of steel structures.  
2. Comprehensive development of the design and associated analysis of critical components such as joints, 
fasteners etc.  
3. Practicing limit state design of structural steel members subjected to compressive, tensile and bending 
loads, including connections as per Indian Standard codes.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to:  
1. Design bolted and welded connections f or steel structures.  
2. Design tension members, understand the effect of shear lag and understand the design concept of axially 
loaded columns and column base connections.  
3. Understand specific problems related to the design of laterally restrained and unrestra ined steel beams.  
4. Design structural systems such as roof trusses, gantry girders as per provisions of Indian Standard code 
for working stress and limit state methods.  
 
Contents  
Module 1: Introduction (Lectures: 7)  
Mechanical properties and types of struct ural steel; Indian structural steel products; brief on the steps 
involved in the design process of steel structural systems and their elements; type of loads; standards and 
specifications; concept of allowable stress method and limit state design methods f or steel structures; relative 
advantages and limitations; strengths and serviceability.  
 
Module 2: Connections (Lectures: 9)  
Type of fasteners – rivets, bolts and welds; types of connections;relative advantages and limitations; modes 
of failure; concept o f shear lag;prying forces and hanger connection; design of slip critical connections; design 
of joints; eccentrically loaded bolted bracket connections; welds; effective area of welds; fillet and but welded 
connections; axially loaded connections;eccentric ally loaded bracket connections.  
 
Module 3: Tension members (Lectures: 8)  
Types of tension members and sections; behaviour of tension members modes of failure; slenderness ratio; 
net area; net effective sections for plates, angles etc. in tension; design of plate and angle tension members; 
design of built up tension members; con nections in tension members; use of lug angles; design of tension 
splice.  
 
Module 4: Compression members (Lectures: 8)  
Types of compression members and sections;behaviour and types of failures; short and slender columns; 
effective length;design of single section and compound angles - axially loaded solid section columns 
subjected to biaxial bending; design of built up lace d and battened type columns; design of column bases; 
plate and gusseted bases for axially loaded columns; splices for columns.  
 
Module 5: (Lectures: 10)  
Types of steel beam sections; behaviour of beams in flexure; classification of cross sections; flexura l strength 
and lateral stability of beams; shear strength;web buckling, crippling and deflection of beams; design of 
laterally supported beams, solid rolled section beams, plated beams with cover plates, purlin in roof trusses, 
open web and hollow sections  etc.  
 
Text Books  
1. N. Subramanian (2015) Design of Steel Structures, Oxford University Press.  ISBN 9780199460915.  
2. M.L. Gambhir (2013) Fundamentals of Structural Steel Design (1st Ed), McGraw Hill Publication. ISBN 
9781259006760.  
54 
 3. S.K. Duggal (2019) Limit S tate Design of Steel Structures (3rd Ed), McGraw Hill Publication. ISBN 
9789353164874.  
4. K.S. Sai Ram (2015) Design of Steel Structures (2nd Ed), Pearson Education. ISBN 9789332542105.  
5. M.R. Shiyekar (2017) Limit State Design in Structural Steel (3rd Ed), Pre ntice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd. ISBN 
9788120353503.  
 
Additional References  
Design of Steel Structures I (2009) by Prof. S.R. Satish Kumar and Prof. A.R. Santha Kumar on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac .in/courses/105/106/105106112/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55 
 Title  Advanced Structural Design  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech. [CIE], M Tech [CIE]  Type  PE 
Prerequisite  Reinforced Concrete Design    
Objectives  
This course aims at:  
1. Providing in -depth advance knowledge on the behaviour of RCC and steel structures.  
2. Develop an understanding with respect to design of different structural components such as deep beam, 
shear wall etc.  
3. Practicing detailing procedures and developing design skills of RCC and steel structures using Indian and 
foreign standard codes.  
  
Lear ning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to:  
1. Assess the behaviour of RCC and steel structures and apply the appropriate design methodology and 
reinforcement detailing for different types of RCC and steel structural elements.  
2. Design and provide detailing of multistoried RCC and steel buildings considering dead, wind and seismic 
forces as per Indian and international standard codes.  
 
Contents  
Module 1  
Review of basics concepts: Design philosophy, modelling of loads, material ch aracteristics. (Lectures: 4)  
Durability and mix design of concrete. (Lectures: 4)  
Module 2  
Advanced reinforced concrete design: P -M, M -phi relationships, strut -and-tie method, design of deep beam 
and corbel; design using Indian, America and European standa rds. (Lectures: 9)  
Module 3  
Design of shear walls, compression field theory for shear design, design against torsion. (Lectures: 9)  
Module 4  
Advanced design of  steel structures: Stability design; torsional buckling (pure, flexural and lateral); design 
usin g Indian and AISC Standards; Eurocode. (Lectures: 9)  
Module 5  
Design of beam -columns, fatigue resistant design, fire rating and minimum thickness etc. (Lectures: 7)  
  
Text Books  
1. P.C. Varghese (2005) Advanced Reinforced Concrete Design (2nd Ed), Prentice Ha ll of India  
2. C.-K. Wang, C.H. Solomon, J. A. Pincheira (2007) Reinforced Concrete Design (7th Ed), John Wiley and 
Sons.  
3. J.G. MacGregor, J.K. Wight (2008) Reinforced Concrete: Mechanics and Design (5th Ed), Pearson 
Education.  
4. U.S. Pillai, D. Menon (2016) Reinforced Concrete Design (3rd Ed), Tata McGraw -Hill Publishing Co. Ltd. 
ISBN 9780070141100.  
5. N. Subramanian (2015) Design of Steel Structures, Oxford University Press.  ISBN 9780199460915.  
 
Additional References  
1. Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures (2 009) by Dr. Nirjhar Dhang on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/105/105105105/  
2. Design of Steel Structures I (2009) by Prof. S.R. Satish Kumar and Prof. A.R. Santha Kumar on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/106/105106112/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56 
 Title  Dynamics of Structure  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech. [CIE]  Type  PE 
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
This course aims at:  
1. Introducing the behaviour of structures (especially framed building) to various dynamic loads, viz. 
earthquake, machine vibration etc.  
2. Fundamental understanding to analyze structures subjected to dynamic excitation and computing 
quantities like displacements, forces, stresses etc.  
3. Analytical and numerical methods as well as procedures in a way that emphasize physical insight.  
4. Problem solving ability for dynamic response in Civil Engine ering design.  
  
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to:  
1. Establish dynamic equilibrium and equation of motion for structural systems.  
2. Analyze the dynamic response and stress generation in single and multi degree of freedom systems for 
different  types of loading.  
3. Implement the basis for the classical energy formulations in dynamical systems.  
4. Model structural damping and solve problems in frequency as well as time domain.  
5. Solve the eigenvalue problems and gain knowledge on its useful properties.  
6. Device methods to protect new and existing structures against seismic collapse.  
7. Apply the structural dynamics theory to real -world problems like seismic analysis and design of 
structures.  
 
Contents  
Module 1  
Introduction to dynamics of structure: Review of b asic concepts of dynamic loading and response; degrees 
of freedom; types of mass -spring -damper system; equation of motion using direct equilibration, principle of 
virtual displacement and Hamilton’s principle. (Lectures: 3)  
Single -degree of freedom system:  Development of equation of motion; statement of problem and solution; 
damped and undamped systems; free vibration response; logarithmic decrement. (Lectures: 5)  
Module 2  
Solution of different loading cases: Responses to harmonic, periodic, arbitrary, pulse etc. excitations; 
numerical evaluation; generalized system. (Lectures: 8)  
Module 3  
Two -degree of freedom system: Development of equation of motion; statement of problem and solution 
methods; free vibration response; damping; natural vibration frequen cies and modes; computation of 
vibration properties. (Lectures: 10)  
Module 4  
Multiple degree of freedom system: Solving problems with more than two degrees of freedom systems; static 
condensation. (Lectures: 6)  
Damping in structures: Estimating modal dampi ng ratios; construction of damping matrix. (Lectures: 3)  
Module 5  
Introduction to Earthquake response: Response of linear elastic building subjected to seismic excitation; basic 
concepts of vibration control. (Lectures: 7)  
 
Text Books  
1. J.M. Biggs (1964) Introduction to Structural Dynamics, McGraw Hill, NY. ISBN 07 -005255 -7. 
2. R.W. Clough and J. Penzien (1993) Dynamics of Structures (2nd Ed), McGraw Hill Inc Editor. ISBN 0 -07-
011392 -0. 
3. A.K. Chopra (2017) Dynamics of Structures Theory and Application to Earth quake Engineering (5th Ed), 
Prentice Hall, NJ. ISBN 978 -0-134-55512 -6. 
4. A.K. Jain (2017) Dynamics of Structures with MATLAB® Applications, Pearson Education, Chennai, 
India. ISBN 978 -9-332-55855 -7 
5. M. Paz and Y.H. Kim (2019) Structural Dynamics Theory and Co mputation (6th Ed), Springer Nature, 
Switzerland. ISBN 978 -3-319-94742 -6. 
57 
  
Additional References  
Structural Dynamics (2012) by Dr. Pradipta Banerji on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/ 101/105101006/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58 
 Title  Finite Element Method  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech. [CIE], M Tech [CIE]  Type  Program elective (PE)  
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
This course aims at:  
1. Introduction to fundamental concepts of finite element analysis.  
2. Development of analytical skills to compute quantities like displacements, stresses etc. in structures 
subjected to static and dynamic forces . 
3. Analytical and numerical methods as well as procedures in a way that emphasize physical insight.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to:  
1. Establish equilibrium equations of structural systems.  
2. Analyze the responses and stresses generated in structures subjected to different types of static loading.  
3. Apply the FEM to solve real -world problems of the building, bridges etc.  
 
Contents  
Module 1(Lectures: 6)  
Fundamental concepts: Introduction to FEM; stresses and equilibrium; boundary conditions; st rain-
displacement and stress -strain relations; governing equation and its solution approximations (e.g. 
Collocation, Least Squares, Galerkin’s method, the Ritz method).  
 
Module 2(Lectures: 10)  
Introduction to calculus of variations: Functionals; extremiza tion; variational form from differential equation; 
principle of virtual work and minimum potential energy.  
Concept of discretization of structures and shape functions; Lagrangian and serendipity elements; 
isoparametric formulation.  
 
Module 3(Lectures: 9)  
Analysis of framed structures: plane stress and plane strain problems; axisymmetric problems; 3D stress 
analysis.  
 
Module 4(Lectures: 10)  
Analysis of plate and shell.  
Numerical integration: Numerical integration formulae; order of integration; error analysis and convergence.  
 
Module 5(Lectures: 7)  
Programming applications: Computer implementations of algorithms.  
Application of FEM in dynamics: Eigenvalues and orthogona lity.  
 
Text Books  
1. J.N. Reddy (2003) An Introduction to the Finite Element Method (2nd Ed), Tata McGraw Hill.  
2. C.S. Krishnamoorthy (1994) Finite Elements Analysis: Theory and Programming (2nd Ed), Tata McGraw 
Hill.  
3. R.D. Cook, D.S. Malkus, M.E. Plesha (2002)  Concepts and Applications of Finite Element Analysis (4th 
Ed), John Wiley & Sons.  
4. O.C. Zienkiewicz, R.L. Taylor, J.Z. Zhu (2005) Finite Element Method Its Basis and Fundamentals (6th Ed), 
Elsevier  
5. S.S. Rao (1999) Finite Element Method in Engineering (3rd Ed), Butterworth Heinemann.  
6. K.J. Bathe (2002) Finite Element Procedures, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
59 
 Title  Earthquake Engineering  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech. [CIE], M Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
This course aims at:  
1. Introduction to fundamental concepts of earthquake analysis.  
2. Development of analytical skills to compute quantities like displacements, stresses etc. in structures 
subjected to ground motions.  
3. Analytical and numerical methods as well as procedures in a way that emphasize physical insight.  
4. Problem solving ability for dynamics loads in seismic design of structures.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to:  
1. Establish equilibrium equation of structural systems subjected to ground motion based excitations.  
2. Analyze the responses and stresses generated in structures subjected to seismic loading.  
3. Apply the frequency and time analysis methods to solve problems of t he building, bridges etc. due to 
seismic activity.  
 
Contents  
Module 1(Lectures: 10)  
Basic of earthquake engineering: Cause and source of earthquakes; magnitude and intensity; ground motions; 
site effects; sensors; equation of motion.  
Response spectrum: Co nstruction of response spectrum; response spectrum characteristics; design of 
response spectrum.  
 
Module 2(Lectures: 9)  
Linear earthquake analysis: Idealization of structures; response spectrum analysis; coupled systems; 
frequency domain analysis; time do main analysis.  
 
Module 3(Lectures: 8)  
Nonlinear earthquake analysis: Force -deformation relationships; equation of motion for nonlinear system; 
controlling parameters.  
 
Module 4(Lectures: 8)  
Earthquake resistance design: Philosophy of ductility based design; detailing provisions; concepts of passive 
controls.  
 
Module 5(Lectures: 7)  
Geotechnical aspects: Dynamic properties of soil; dynamic earth pressures; liquefaction and ground 
improvement t echniques; retrofitting and strengthening of buildings and bridges.  
 
Text Books  
1. R.W. Clough and J. Penzien (1993) Dynamics of Structures (2nd Ed), McGraw Hill  
2. M. Paz (1987) Dynamics of Structures, CBS Publication.  
A. K. Chopra (2007) Dynamics of Structures - Theory and Application to Earthquake Engineering (3rd Ed), 
Pearson Education.  
3. T. Paulay and M.S.N. Priestley (1992) Seismic Design of Reinforced Concrete and Masonry Buildings, John 
Wiley and Sons.  
4. D. J. Dowrick (1987) Earthquake Resistant Design for Engi neers and Architects, John Wiley and Sons.  
 
Additional References  
Introduction to Earthquake Engineering (2013) by Prof. R.S. Jangid on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/101/105101004/  
 
 
 
60 
 Title  Concrete Technology  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-3 [4.5]  
Offered for  B.Tech. [CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
This course aims at:  
Introduction to fundamental concepts  and physical insight of cement concrete.  
Development of skills for mix design of concrete with admixtures.  
Comprehensive understanding of chemical and physical processes attached to the cement concrete.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to : 
Mix design the concrete based on different material properties to attain desired quality control.  
Use admixtures for designing concrete with different applications.  
Understand the behaviour of cement concrete and its performance in presence of admixtu res and 
environmental exposures  
 
Contents  
Module 1(Lectures: 8)  
Introduction to materials: Concrete materials; cement - physical tests; hydration; Bogues equation; 
aggregates; water - quality for mixing and curing.  
 
Module 2(Lectures: 8)  
Admixtures: Introduction to admixtures, types of admixtures; accelerating admixtures; retarding admixtures; 
air entraining admixtures; plasticizers.  
Batching, mixing and transportation; placing of concrete; curing of concrete.  
 
Module 3(Lectures: 10)  
Mix Design of concrete: Factors influencing mix proportion; mix design methods; design of high strength 
concrete; strength of concrete - important factors.  
 
Module 4(Lectures: 9)  
Properties of concrete: Interfacial transition zone; microstructure of concrete;  shrinkage and temperature 
effects; creep; permeability; durability; thermal properties; micro -cracking.  
 
Module 5(Lectures: 7)  
Advanced topics: Introduction to special concrete; lightweight concrete; fiber reinforced concrete; polymer 
modified concrete; Ferrocement; ready mix concrete; self compacting concrete.  
Quality control: Sampling and testing; acceptance criteria.  
 
Text Books  
A. Neville (2011) Properties of Concrete (5th Ed), Pearson Education India. ISBN  9788131791073.  
M. L. Gambhir (2017) Concre te Technology (5th Ed), McGraw Hill Education. ISBN 9781259062551.  
M.S. Shetty, A.K.  Jain (2019) Concrete Technology: Theory and Practice (8th Ed), S. Chand Publishing. ISBN 
9789352533800.  
A.M. Neville, J.J. Brooks (2010) Concrete Technology (2nd Ed), Pea rson Education. ISBN  9780273732198.  
P.K. Mehta, P.J.M. Monteiro (2014) Concrete: Microstructure, Properties, and Materials (4th Ed), McGraw 
Hill. ISBN 9789339204761.  
 
Additional References  
Concrete Technology (2014) by Dr. B. Bhattacharjee on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/102/105102012/  
 
Laboratory Contents  
Determination of fineness and specific gravity of cement.  
Determination of consistency of standard cement paste.  
Determination of initial and final setting times of cement.  
61 
 Determination of compressive strength of cement.  
Determination of soundness of cement by Le -Chatelier’s apparatus.  
Workability tests: slump cone test, compaction factor test, Vee -Bee consistomete r and flow test.  
Determination of compressive strength of concrete specimens.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62 
 Title  Prestressed Concrete Structures  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech. [CIE], M Tech [CIE]  Type  PE 
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
This course aims at:  
Fundamental understanding of the behaviour of prestressed concrete structures.  
Developing skills for analysis and design of prestressed sections in beams, columns, bridges etc.  
  
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to:  
Assess the effect of losses and forces such as axial, flexure, shear and torsion in prestressing.  
Design the beams, columns, bridge decks etc. based on prestressed concrete.  
 
Con tents  
Module 1  
Introduction to prestressing system:  Basics of prestressed concrete structures and advantages; types of 
prestressing; pre - and post -tensioning systems and devices; review of concrete - properties; prestressing steel 
– forms, types and proper ties. (Lectures: 8)  
Module 2  
Losses in prestress: Elastic shortening; friction; anchorage slip; force variation; creep; shrinkage. (Lectures: 3)  
Analysis of members: Analysis under axial load - permissible prestress based on transfer, stresses under 
servic e loads, ultimate strength of member; Analysis of members under flexure – at transfer and service, 
calculation of cracking moment, location of kern points and pressure lines, ultimate strength. (Lectures: 5)  
Module 3  
Design of member sections: For axial te nsion; flexure – type 1 and type 2; choice of section; limiting zone; 
Magnel’s graphical method; tendon profile and reinforcement detailing. (Lectures: 7)  
Analysis and design for shear and torsion: Cracks and modes of failure due to shear and torsion; effect of 
prestressing force; limit state of collapse for shear and torsion; design of longitudinal and transverse 
reinforcement. (Lectures: 6)  
Module 4  
Deflection, camber and crack width: Deflection due to gravity load and prestressing; camber; determinat ion 
of flexural crack width; limits of deflection and crack width. (Lectures: 3)  
Transmission of prestress: Pre - and post -tensioned members. (Lectures: 2)  
Analysis and tendon profile of cantilever and continuous beams. (Lectures: 3)  
Miscellaneous topics: D esign of composite sections, one - and two -way slabs, compression members etc. 
(Lectures: 5)  
 
Text Books  
C.W. Dolan, H.R. Hamilton (2019) Prestressed Concrete Building, Design, and Construction, Springer. ISBN 
9783319978819.  
N. Krishna Raju (2006) Prestressed Concrete (3rd Ed), Tata McGraw -Hill Publishing Company Ltd. ISBN 
0070634440.  
E.G. Nawy (2005) Prestressed Concrete – A Fundamental Approach (5th Ed), Pearson. ISBN 9780131497597.  
 
Additional References  
Prestressed Concrete Structures (2009) by  Prof. Amlan K. Sengupta and Prof. Devdas Menon on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/106/105106117/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
 Title  Prefabricated Structures  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech. [CIE], M Tech [CIE]  Type  PE 
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
This course aims at:  
Imparting knowledge on modular construction, industrialised construction and design of prefabricated 
elements  and construction methods.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to:  
Understand the design, transportation and erection steps required in the prefabricated structures.  
Understand the concepts of joint flexibility and deformation for different t ypes of joints and connections.  
 
Contents  
Module 1  
Introduction to prefabricated structures:  Need for prefabrication and its principles; prefabrication materials 
for precast elements; modular coordination; standardization; systems; production; transportation; site 
erection; quality control. (Lectures: 8)  
Module 2  
Prefabricated components: Behaviour of structural components, large panel constructions; construction of 
roof and floor slabs; wall panels; columns; shear walls. (Lectures: 9)  
Module 3  
Design principles: Disuniting of structures; design of cross section based on efficiency of material; problems 
in design because of joint flexibility; allowance for joint deformation. (Lectures: 9)  
Module 4  
Joint in structural members: Joints for different  structural connections; dimensions and detailing; design of 
expansion joints. (Lectures: 8)  
Module 5  
Design for extreme loads:  Progressive collapse; codal provisions; equivalent design loads for considering 
effects such as earthquakes, cyclones etc.; impo rtance of avoidance of progressive collapse.  (Lectures: 8)  
 
Reference Books/ Reports  
H. Bachmann, A. Steinle (2011) Precast Concrete Structures, Wilhelm Ernst & Sohn. ISBN 9783433029602.  
Precast Concrete Connection Details - Structural Design Manual (1978), Society for Studies on the use of 
Precast Concrete, Netherlands.  
K.S. Elliott (2002) Precast Concrete Structures, Butterworth -Heinemann. ISBN 0750650842.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64 
 Title   Highway Geometric Design  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech. [CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The course will help students to understand the concepts involved in geometric design of intersections, 
horizontal & vertical alignment of roads & pedestrian facilities.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
At the end of the course, the student should be able to:  
Describe the urban street hierarchy and functional classification system.  
Demonstrate the relationship between mobility and access and formulate a functional design process that 
accommodates the needs of all users and allows for street designs that are compatible with the surrounding 
area.  
Identify and define the elements of a roadway cross -section.  
Design alignment and grade elements i ncluding sight distance; horizontal and vertical curves; and terrain 
and acceptance grades for urban local and collector streets.  
Define the functional area of an intersection and identify key design elements for intersections.  
Identify pedestrian street crossing issues.  
Understand  the design concepts of smart city roads  
 
Contents  
MODULE I:[Lectures – 9] 
Highway Cross Section Elements and Geometric Design: Functional Classification of Highway System; 
Design Control characteristics, Objectives and elements  of Geometric Design, Pavement Surface 
characteristics, Camber, Objectives of Camber, design standards.  
 
MODULE II: Lectures – 12] 
Horizontal and Vertical Alignment: Objectives of horizontal curves, Super elevation, Minimum Radius of 
Curve, Extra widening on Curves, Transition Curves, Types of Gradients, Vertical Curves – Types and 
Design, Grade Compensation, Sight Distances, Importance of Sight Distances for Horizontal and Vertical 
Curves.  
 
MODULE III:[Lectures – 8] 
Intersection Design: Types of Intersecti ons; Design Principles for Intersections; Design of At -grade 
Intersections – Channelization, Objective; Traffic Islands and Design standards; Rotary Intersection – Concept 
and Design, Advantages and Disadvantages; Grade separated Interchanges – Types, warr ants and Design 
standards  
 
MODULE IV:[Lectures -5] 
Traffic signs and road markings: Types of Road Signs; Guidelines for the provision of Road Signs; Cautionary 
Signs, Regulatory Signs, Information Signs – Design standards; Road markings – Objective of Road  Markings; 
Types of Road Markings; Role of Road markings in Road Safety and Traffic Regulation; Specification for Road 
Markings. Highway Appurtenances – Delineators, Traffic Impact Attenuators, Safety Barriers.  
 
MODULE V: [Lectures -8] 
Miscellaneous Elemen ts: Requirements of Pedestrians; Pedestrian facilities on Urban Roads; Cycle Tracks – 
Guidelines and Design standards; Bus bays – Types and Guidelines; Design of On -street and Off -street 
Parking facilities – Guidelines for lay out Design; Design concepts o f smart city roads  
 
Text Books  
L.R. Kadiyali and N.B. Lal, Principles and Practice of Highway Engineering, Khanna Publications  
C.E.G. Justo and S.K. Khanna, Highway Engineering, Nem Chand and Brothers.  
 
Additional References  
IRC Codes for Signs, Markings a nd Mixed Traffic Control in Urban Areas.  
65 
 Traffic Engineering and Transportation Planning, L.R.Kadiyali, Khanna Publications.  
Chai K. Toh, Julio A. Sanguesa, Juan C. Cano and Francisco J. Martinez. Advances in smart roads for future 
smart cities.  
https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rspa.2019.0439  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66 
 Title  Pavement Engineering  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech. [CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The course will help students to understand about the materials, analysis, design, and construction of 
different types of pavements.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
At the end of the course, the student should be able to:  
Characterize the response characteristics of soil, aggregate, asphalt, and asphalt mixes  
Analyze flexible pavements  
Analyze rigid pavements   
Design a flexible pavement using IRC and AASHTO methods  
Design a rigid pavement using IRC, and AASHTO methods.  
Contents  
Module 1 :Pavement Materials [Lectures – 10] 
Types and component parts of pavements, highway and airport pavements, Materials used in pavements, 
basic soil properties relevant to pavement applications, resilient modulus, and modulus of subgrade reaction, 
Physical properties of aggregates and blending , Basic properties of bitumen, polymer and rubber modified 
bitumen, Dynamic modulus, flow time and flow number of bituminous mixes. Cement: chemical 
composition, types, physical properties. Distresses in flexible and rigid pavements. Use of geosynthetics i n 
pavements.  
 
Module II: Analysis & Stresses in Pavements [Lectures – 12] 
Stresses in flexible pavements: layered system concepts, stress solution for one, two and three -layered 
systems, fundamental design concepts. Stresses in rigid pavements: Westergaar d’s theory and assumptions, 
stresses due to curling, stresses and deflections due to loading, frictional stresses, stresses in dowel bars and 
tie bars.  
 
Module III: Factors Affecting Pavement Design [Lectures – 12] 
Variables considered in pavement design, Classification of axle types, articulated commercial vehicles, legal 
axle and gross weights on single and multiple units, tyre pressure, contact pressure, ESWL, EWLF and EAL 
concepts, Traffic analysis: ADT, AADT, growth factor, lane distribution, direction al distribution and vehicle 
damage factors.  
 
Module IV: Design of Pavements [Lectures -8] 
IRC method of flexible pavement design, IRC methods of rigid pavement design, AASHTO method of flexible 
pavement design, AASHTO method of rigid pavement design  
 
Text Books  
Yoder and Witezak, Principles of Pavement Design, John Wiley and sons.  
Harold N. Atkins, Highway Materials, Soils, and Concrete, Prentice Hall  
IRC: 37 -2012, Guidelines for the Design of Flexible Pavements, The Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi, India  
IRC: 58 -2011, Guidelines for the Design of Plain Jointed Rigid Pavements for Highways, The Indian Roads 
Congress, New Delhi, India  
 
Additional References  
Yang, Design of functional pavements, McGraw -Hill.  
Robert D. Krebs, Highway Materials, McGraw Hill T ext 
Asphalt Institute, The Asphalt Handbook  
RRL, DSIR, Concrete Roads, HMSO, IRC Publications  
Huang, Y.H. Pavement Analysis and Design, Second Edition, Dorling Kindersley (India) Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi  
Mallick, R.B. and T. El -Korchi Pavement Engineering – Principles and Practice, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis 
Group, Florida, USA7.  
Papagiannakis, A.T. and E.A. Masad Pavement Design and Materials, John Wiley and Sons, New Jersey, USA, 
2008.  
67 
 Title  Traffi c system and ITS  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech. [CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite     
 
Objectives  
The course will help students to understand the working and control of traffic engineering elements and its 
integration with advanced technologies such as ITS.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
At the end of the course, the student should be able to:  
Analyse the road traffic characteristics and can undertake various types of road traffic st udies  
Suggest and design appropriate control measures for traffic congestion management  
Understand the role of ANN and fuzzy logic in traffic control measures  
Understand the fundamentals and taxonomy of Intelligent Transport System (ITS) and ITS user servi ces 
Understand the integration of ITS to transportation planning  
Have knowledge on various public transportation systems.  
 
Contents  
MODULE I: [No. of lectures – 10] 
Traffic system characteristics: Road, User and Vehicle characteristic Traffic studies: Volu me studies, Origin -
Destination Studies; Speed studies, Parking studies, Accident studies  
 
MODULE II: [No. of lectures – 12] 
Traffic control devices: Definition, necessity, types; Road signs and markings definition, classification. Traffic 
signals - locatio n, types, signal design by IRC method, Websters methods and HCM method, ANN and Fuzzy 
logic concepts in traffic control  
 
MODULE III: [No. of lectures – 15]: 
Intelligent Transport System [ITS]: Introduction, ITS user services - Travel and traffic management , Public 
Transport operations, Electronic payment, Commercial vehicle operation, Advanced vehicle control and 
safety system, Emergency management, Information management, Maintenance and construction 
management; ITS architecture and planning; Integration o f ITS into transportation planning  
 
MODULE IV: [No. of lectures -5] 
Public Transportation System: Evolution of public transport system, Need and benefits; Classifications; Rapid 
Transit systems - BRTS, MRTS, Intermediate Public Transport; Public Transport s ystem in India  
 
Text Books  
Nicholas J Garber and Lester A Hoel. Traffic and Highway Engineering. Copyright: Brooks/Cole -Wadsworth 
Group \Thomson learning  
Fred. L. Mannering, Walter P. Kilareski, and Scott S. Washburn. Principles of Highway Engineering and 
Traffic Analysis. Copyright: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.  
M A Chowdhary and A Sadek. Fundamentals of Intelligent Transportation systems planning. Artech House 
Inc., US, 2003.  
Bob Williams. Intelligent transportation systems standards. Artech House, London, 2008  
Sussman, J. Perspectives on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). New York, NY: Springer, 2005  
Daganzo, C. F. and Quyang, Y. Public Transportation Systems: Principles of system design, operations 
planning and real -time control. World Scientific Pu blishers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 
 Title  Urban Transportation Planning  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech. [CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The course will provide students in-depth understanding on designing, conducting, and   administering 
surveys to provide the data required for transportation planning and will make them understand travel 
demand modelling procedures.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
At the end of the course, the student  should be able to:  
Design, conduct, and administer surveys to provide the data required for transportation planning  
Develop and calibrate trip generation rates for specific types of land use developments.  
Estimate the traffic impact of new developments u sing the four -stage sequential models.  
Assess the impact of the transportation project on the land use  
 
Contents  
Module I: Urban Transportation Planning Process & Concepts [Lectures -9]: 
Role of Transportation and Changing Concerns of Society in Transporta tion Planning; Transportation 
Problems and Problem Domain; Objectives and Constraints; Flow Chart for Transportation Planning Process - 
Inventory, Model Building, Forecasting and Evaluation Stages, Planning in System Engineering Framework; 
Concept of Travel  Demand and its Modelling based on Consumer Behaviour of Travel Choices - Independent 
Variables, Travel Attributes.  
 
Module II: Travel demand estimation [Lectures – 13] 
Assumptions in Demand Estimation - Sequential, Recursive and Simultaneous Process - Introduction to 
Transportation Planning Practices; Definition of Study Area, Zoning. Trip Generation Analysis: Trip 
Generation Models - Zonal Models, Category analysis, Household Models, Trip Attractions of Work Centres 
& Commercial Trips Trip Distribution Anal ysis: Trip End and Trip Interchange Models; Trip Distribution 
Models - Growth Factor Models, Gravity Models, Opportunity Models and their calibration; Estimation of 
Travel Demand based on link volume philosophy.  
 
Module III: Mode Split and Route Split ana lysis [Lectures -13] 
Mode Split Analysis - Mode Choice Behaviour, Competing Modes, Mode Split Curves, Probabilistic Models 
and Two Stage Mode Split Analysis; Route Split Analysis - Elements of Transportation Networks, Coding, 
Minimum Path Trees, Diversion Curves, All -or-Nothing Assignment, Capacity Restrained Assignment, 
Multipath Assignment  
 
Module IV: Landuse -Transportation Models: [Lectures -7] 
Location models - Opportunity Models, Lowry based Landuse -Transportation Models – Allocation Function, 
Constraints, Travel Demand Est imation – Iterative Solutions, Matrix Formulation, Dynamic and 
Disaggregated extensions.  
 
Text Books  
Hutchinson, B.G., Principles of Urban Transportation System Planning, Mc -Graw Hill   
Khisty, C J., Transportation Engineering – An Introduction, Prentice -Hall, NJ  
Kanafani, A., Transportation Demand Analysis, McGraw -Hill.  
 
Additional references  
Wilson, A.G, Urban and Regional Models in Geography and Planning, John Wiley and Sons.  
Dickey, J.W., Metropolitan Transportation Planning, Tata Mc -Graw Hill 1980  
ITE (1982), 'Transportation and Traffic Engineering Hand Book', Chapters 10,12, and 17, Prentice Hall, New 
Jersey  
Oppenheim, N., Applied Models in Urban and Regional Analysis, Prentice -Hall, NJ.  
Dickey J.W., et. al., Metropolitan Transportation Planning,  Tata McGraw -Hill.  
Gallion A.B and Eisner S., The Urban Pattern, Affiliated East -West Press, New Delhi.  
 
69 
 Title  Geology for Civil Engineers  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B. Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
Introducing geological materials, forces, and processes that influence the design and execution of a variety of 
civil and infrastructure engineering projects and their safety.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
After completing this course a student would be able to  
Identify different minerals and rocks based on their easily determined properties.  
Understand different erosional and depositional activities and landforms associated with streams, glacier 
movement, ocean a ctivity, and wind activity.  
Measure strength and elastic properties of different rocks and classify them as per engineering needs.  
Understand the activities related to earthquakes, landslides, and volcanoes that can create hazards to 
engineering structure s. 
Undertake basic engineering geological investigation and prepare and comprehensive site investigation 
report.  
 
Content  
Module I: Basics of Geology[Lectures: 7]  
Rock types and minerals; Geological time scale;dating methods; Mechanisms of deformation; Fol ds, faults, 
and joints; Primary structures of sedimentary rocks; Potential problems from rock structures in engineering 
construction.  
 
Module II: Geological Processes[Lectures: 13]  
Streams: Development stages; Classification of streams; Stream channels; Ch annel morphology; Drainage 
basin; Basin morphology; Geologic work of streams; Fluvial landforms.  
Glaciers: Glaciers; Glacier movement; Glacial processes; Erosional landforms; Depositional landforms.  
Ocean: Features of an ocean; The ocean sediments; Shore  processes; Coastal erosion and sediment transport; 
Depositional features.  
Wind: Processes of wind erosion; Sediment transport; Erosional landforms; Depositional landforms.  
 
Module III: Natural Hazards[Lectures: 10]  
Earthquakes: Locating an earthquake; m easure; World distribution; Important of plate boundaries; 
Earthquake hazards.  
Volcanoes: Volcanic features; Magma types; Geographic distribution of volcanoes; Mode of eruption; 
Volcanic explosivity Index; Submarine volcano; Volcanic landforms.  
Landslide s: Causes of landslides; Types of landslides; Kinetic and kinematic methods of investigation; 
Hazard zonation mapping; Landslide hazard mitigation; Statistical investigation of landslide.  
 
Module IV: Site Geology[Lectures: 12]  
Engineering Properties of Ro cks: Weathering of rock; Common properties of rocks; Strength and elastic 
properties of rocks; Rock mass properties; Rock Mass Rating; Geological Strength Index.  
Site Investigation and: Stages of site investigation; Aerial photography and remote sensing; Geophysical 
investigation; Subsoil exploration and sampling of soils; Methods of subsoil exploration; Exploratory drilling; 
Water pumping tests.  
Writing Engineering Geology Report: Objective of a report; Basic aspects; Geologic inputs; Different phases 
of site investigation; Special investigation; in -field preparation.  
 
Textbooks  
S. Gangopadhyay (2013). Engineering Geology. Oxford University Press . ISBN -13: 978 -0-19-808635 -2. 
Sreepat Jain (2014) Fundamentals of Physical geology. Springer. ISBN 978 -81-322-1539 -4. 
 
Other Reference Material  
B. Singh, R. K. Goel.(2011)Engineering Rock Mass Classification. Elsevier. ISBN 978 -0-12-385878 -8. 
70 
 R. E. Hunt ()  Geologic Hazards: A Field Guide for Geotechnical Engineers. CRC Press: Taylor & Francis 
Group. ISBN ‐13: 978‐1‐4200‐5250‐3. 
 
Online course Material  
Prof. Debasis Deb (2009) Engineering Geology. NPTEL. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/105/105105106/#  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71 
 Title  Ground Improvement Techniques  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
This course aims at :  
Introducing the need for ground improvement and available techniques.  
Introducing the aspects of soil shear strength modification for effective design of foundations.  
Introducing recent soil modification techniques.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to  
Apply the ground modification techniques for efficient design of foundations  
Utilize the concepts of pr eloading and dewatering in soils of cohesive nature  
Stabilize the soils using different mechanical and chemical approaches  
 
Contents  
Module 1 [Lectures: 10]  
Classical examples of soil failure, need of ground improvement, In -situ densification methods, in s itu 
densification of granular and cohesive soils; vibration at ground surface and at depth  
 
Module 2 [Lectures: 10]  
Preloading and dewatering, prefabricated vertical drains (PVDs), sand drains, geodrains, filter requirements, 
spacing effects, stone columns , sumps and interceptor ditches, single and multi -stage well points, vacuum 
well points, horizontal wells,electro osmosis.  
 
Module 3 [Lectures: 10]  
Stabilization of soils, methods of soil stabilization - mechanical, cement, lime,bitumen and polymer 
stabiliz ation, use of industrial wastes like fly ash and granulated blast furnace slag, Reinforced Earth 
Technology, concept of soil reinforcement; reinforcing materials; backfill criteria; design of reinforcement for 
internal stability; applications of reinforced  earth structures  
 
Module 4 [Lectures: 10]  
 
Grouting techniques, types of grouts, grouting equipment and machinery, injection methods, grout 
monitoring, stabilization with cement, lime and chemicals,stabilization of expansive soils, geosynthetics, type 
of geosynthetics, geotextiles, geomembranes and gabions, miscellaneous methods -soil nailing, thermal 
methods  
 
Text Books  
Hausmann, M.R. (1990). Engineering Principles of Ground Modification, McGraw -Hill International 
Editions. ISBN: 9780070272798.  
Dr. Purusho ttama Raj (2005). Ground Improvement Techniques. Laxmi Publications. ISBN: 9788170088370.  
Budhu. M (2012). Soil Mechanics and Foundations (3rd Ed). John Wiley and Sons. ISBN: 978 -0-470-55684 -9. 
 
Online references  
Ground Improvement Techniques by Prof. G.L. Sivakumar Babu on NTPEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/108/105108075/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72 
 Title  Introduction to Soil Dynamics  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
This course aims at :  
1. Introducing basic concepts of soil dynamics.  
2. Understanding the challenges involved in design of  foundations subjected to dynamic loads.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to  
1. Evaluate the stresses in soils due to dynamic loads  
2. Analyze the dynamic behavior of soils through laboratory and field tests  
3. Apply the principles of earthquake ge otechnology in foundation design  
 
Contents  
Module 1 [Lectures: 8]  
Nature of dynamic loads, vibration theory, single and two -degree freedom systems, free and forced 
vibrations, wave propagation in elastic rods, shear and compressional velocities  
  
Module 2  [Lectures: 10]  
Behavior of cyclically loaded soils, small and large strain dynamic soil properties, laboratory element tests 
and field tests, design principles for machine foundations, Elastic homogeneous half -space and lumped 
parameter solutions, codal r ecommendations  
  
Modules 3 [Lectures: 12]  
Earthquake geotechnology, causes and effects of earthquakes, strong ground motion, measurement, 
characterization and estimation, theory of amplification, ground response analysis, seismic liquefaction and 
mitigatio n techniques, seismic hazard assessment, microzonation, earthquake early warning systems  
  
Module 4 [Lectures: 12]  
Seismic slope stability, seismic earth pressures on retaining structures, bearing capacity of foundations 
against seismic loads, introduction to soil -structure and soil -pipe interaction, seismic vibration isolation and 
damping systems for foundations and structures  
 
Text Books  
1. Kramer S.L. (1996). Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering. Prentice Hall, ISBN -10: 8131707180  
2. Ishihara, K. (1 996). Soil Behavior in Earthquake Geotechnics, Oxford Science Publications, ISBN -
10: 0198562241  
3. Prakash S. (1981). Soil dynamics. McGraw -Hill, ISBN -10: 0070506582  
 
Online video lecture  
Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering by Prof. Deepankar Choudhury on NPT EL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/101/105101134/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
73 
 Title  Advanced Geotechnical Engineering  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech [CIE], M Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite  Geotechnical Engineering (PC)    
Objectives  
This course aims at:  
Introducing basic principles of soil mechanics and foundation design.  
Understanding the complex response of soils to isotropic and anisotropic loading conditions.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to  
1. Assess the stress -strain response of soils to practical loading scenario  
2. Draw stress paths and utilize them for applications in geotechnical enginee ring 
3. Design shallow and pile foundations based on stress transfer mechanism  
4. Assess the stability of retaining walls and slopes under different loading conditions.  
 
Contents  
Module 1 [Lectures: 6]  
Geotechnical lessons learnt from failures -case studies, brie f review of soil behavior under different loading 
conditions, normal stresses and strains, volumetric stresses shear stresses and strains, elastic state and 
anisotropy, total and effective stresses  
 
Module 2 [Lectures: 12]  
Stress path, stress and strain i nvariants, mean and deviatoric stress, axisymmetric condition, plain strain 
condition, Shear strength of soils, drained and undrained shear tests, stress anisotropy, pore water pressure 
parameters, Critical state soil mechanics, failure surface, normally c onsolidated and over consolidated soils 
behavior, critical state boundary, elements of critical state model, failure stresses from critical state  
 
Module 3 [Lectures: 12]  
Shallow foundations, allowable loads and settlements, bearing capacity formulations, bearing capacity from 
field load tests, settlement calculations, Pile foundations, load capacity, pile group capacity, load transfer 
mechanism, lateral load capacity of pile foundations, Earth -retaining structures, modes of failure of earth 
retaining struc tures, stability of rigid and flexible retaining walls, mechanically stabilized earth walls, Slope 
stability, slope failure types, two -dimensional slope stability analysis  
 
Module 4 [Lectures: 6]  
Structural health monitoring of geotechnical structures – shallow and deep foundations, retaining walls, 
tunnels, underground stations, dams and embankments, interpretation of results, mitigation and 
requalification strategies  
 
Module 5 [Lectures: 6]  
Introduction to numerical and analytical modeling in Geomechanics: development of macros in excel, basic 
MATLAB programs and demo of geotechnical software -PLAXIS 2D and 3D, FLAC 2D and 3D, OASys, 
GeoSlope, L -Pile, P -disp/X -disp.  
 
Text Books  
1. Budhu. M (2012). Soil Mechanics and Foundations (3rd Ed). John Wiley  and Sons. ISBN: 978 -0-470-55684 -
9. 
2. Das B.M. (2013). Advanced Soil Mechanics (4th Ed). CRC Press. ISBN -10: 9780415506656  
3. Knappett J.A. and Craig R.F. (2012). Craig’s Soil Mechanics (8th Ed). CRC Press. ISBN -10: 9780415561266.  
 
Online material  
Soil Mechanics course in NPTEL.  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/103/105103097/  
 
 
 
74 
 Title  Air Pollution and Control  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech [CIE], M Tech[CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
1. To gain understanding of the basic concept of air pollution, its sources and effects on human health and 
climate.  
2. To introduce concepts of aerosol dynamics used in ambient sampling, designing measurement 
technologies and air quality modelling.  
3. To develop understanding of the concepts and strategies for control of particulate matter and gas -phase 
pollutants.  
4. To provi de knowledge of the current state of the atmosphere and introduce fundamentals of pollutant 
transport and dispersion, and modelling.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. The students are expected to achieve proficiency in:  
2. Developing a broad overview of local -to-global scal e pollution issues and their specific impact on human 
health and environment.  
3. Solving problems related to dispersion and air quality modelling  
4. Understanding the source level air pollution issues and identifying the right control techniques/measures 
to meet the desired standard levels.  
5. Computing the performance of various unit operations and processes used in the air treatment.  
 
Contents  
Module I : Introduction to air pollution [Lectures 6]  
Historical events [Meuse River Valley 1930, Donora Pennsylvania 1948, London Smog 1952, Bhopal Gas 
Tragedy 1984, and related Concepts], Scales of air pollution, Sources and classification [CAPs and HAPs] of 
air pollutants, Air quality and standards, Emission Inventory, The Earth’s atmosphere: Structure and 
Composition, and energy balance.  
 
Module II: Aerosol Physics [Lectures 10]   
Fundamentals: Source, Size and Size distribution, Gas and Particle motion: Browni an motion, Diffusion, 
Inertia, External force field, Aerosol dynamics: coagulation, condensation, nucleation, particle measurements 
and Sampling techniques  
 
Module III: Emissions Control devices [Lectures 8]  
Removal of particles from gas stream: Settling chambers, Cyclone separators, electrostatic precipitation, 
filtration, wet collectors, collection efficiency; Removal of gases from effluents stream: Absorption by liquids, 
adsorption on solids, Examples: SO2 and NOx removal.  
 
Module IV: Meteorology [Lect ures 6]  
Atmospheric meteorology, Wind velocity profile and Wind rose, turbulence, inversion layer and mixing 
depth and Atmospheric Stability.  
 
Module V: Dispersion of air pollutants and Air Quality modelling [Lecture 6]  
Dispersion models, Gaussian dispers ion model: assumptions, dispersion parameters and effective stack 
height, plume rise and plume behavior, Receptor models, Introduction to Dispersion and receptor modelling 
software.  
 
Module VI: Effects of Air Pollution on Climate and Human health [Lecture s 4]  
Tropospheric Ozone chemistry, Photochemical Smog, Acid Rain, Visibility, Indoor Air Pollution, Dose 
Response and Health effects.  
 
Text Books  
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics - From Air Pollution to Climate Change, J. H. Seinfeld and S. N. Pandis, 
John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Third Edition, 2013.  
75 
 Aerosol Technology -Properties, Behavior and Measurement of Airborne Particles, W. C. Hinds, John Wile y 
and Sons, Inc., Second Edition, 1998.  
Introduction to Air Pollution Science, R. F. Phalen and R. N. Phalen, Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC, 
Burlington, MA, 2013.  
Aerosol Measurement: Principles, Techniques and Applications, edited by K. Willeke, P. Bar on, Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, 1993.  
 
Online Course Material  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105104099/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76 
 Title  Industrial Waste: Control and Utilization  
 Number  MT7LXX0  
Department  Metallurgical and Materials Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3–0–0 [3]  
Offered for  B Tech [CIE], M.Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective 
(PE)  
Prerequisite   
Objective  
Classification of waste products and technological management for their environmental sustainability  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Differentiate among the different kinds of waste.  
2. Find optimum method for waste management.  
 
Content  
Types of waste: Solid, Liquid and gaseous (4 lectures)  
Sources of waste: Industrial: Metallurgical, Pharma & Chemical, Electronic, Biological (8 lectures)  
Recycling of waste: Metal Scrap remelting, Extraction of precious and harmful metals from 
electronic   waste,  (8 lectures)  
Waste to wealth: Waste for energy, Production of commercial nanoparticles from waste ( 8 lectures)  
Treatment Storage and  Disposal of waste:   Long term storage Land filling, incineration; Short term storage 
and container materials (8 lectures)  
Case Studies: Nuclear industry, Biomedical industry, Steel industry (6 lectures)  
 
Text Books  
Pichtel , J.,Waste Management Practices: Municipal, Hazardous, and Industrial, 2nd edition,  CRC Press, 2014.  
Choudhary, C. K., Waste management and bioremediation, Oxford Book Company, 2012.  
 
Self-Learning materials  
Wong, J. W. C, Surampalli, R. Y., Zhang, T. C.,  Tyagi, R. D., Selvan, A.,Sustainable Solid Waste Management,  
American Society of Civil Engineers (2016).  
Ojovan, M. I., Handbook of Advanced Radioactive Waste Conditioning Technologies, Woodhead Publishing 
(2011).  
 
Online Course Material  
1. Dubey, B. K., Electronic Waste Management - Issues and Challenges, Division of Environmental 
Engineering and Management at Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, NPTEL, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_ce07/preview  
2. Dubey, B. K., Integrated Waste Management fo r a Smart City, Division of Environmental Engineering and 
Management at Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, NPTEL, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_ce20/preview  
3. Ramachandra, T. V., Municipal Solid Waste Management, Centre for Ecological Sciences , Indian Institute 
of Science, NPTEL, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/120108005/2#  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
77 
 Title  Surveillance and Security of Infrastructures  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3–0–0 [3]  
Offered for  B. Tech, M.Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective 
(PE)  
Prerequisite   
Objective  
The course will help students to understand the types and methods of surveillance of building, transport and 
other critical infrastructures and will  introduce several security measures for these infrastructures.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
At the end of the course, the student should be able to:  
1. Describe the types of surveillance and components of security system for an infrastructure  
2. Recognize critical infras tructures and perform risk analysis and vulnerability assessment.  
3. Develop surveillance detection plan for a building and can analyse building security  
4. Understand the needs and methods of surveillance and security for transportation  
 
Content  
MODULE I: [No. of lectures -10] 
Introduction to surveillance: Surveillance – definition, needs, and role; types and methods of surveillance, 
components of security system, security of infrastructure -civil structures, network communications, 
electricity grid. Attack method ology/Attack cycle/Pre -incident indicators, Surveillance detection  
 
MODULE II: [No. of lectures -12] 
Critical infrastructures: Introduction, risk analysis and vulnerability assessment, Representation as a complex 
system, modelling and simulation, graphical formalisms, monitoring and surveillance 
technologies.Vulnerability analysis, Potential threats to critical infrastructures and key resources (CI/KR), 
Red Zone analysis  
 
MODULE III: [No. of lectures – 12] 
Building security and control system: Mechanical and  electrical installation security, fire protection and 
escape, monitoring burglary and assault, emergency communication, mobility and access 
management,communication networks of security systems - Energy Management Systems (EMS), Building 
Automation Systems  (BAS), Building Management Systems (BMS), Hostile operations  
 
MODULE IV: [No. of lectures -8] 
Types of Attacks: Surveillance and security of transport infrastructure: In -vehicle, at station, running -way, 
and facility surveillance; technology, data, and re sources; advantages and cautions, risk assessment methods 
and tools, ITS security areas and multi -modal transportation security. Information and Communication 
Technologies(ICT) -based system and security in ITS, Security and performance measures, Type of at tacks  
 
Text Books  
1. Petersen, J. K. Introduction to surveillance studies, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group  
2. Yan, Q. W. Introduction to intelligent surveillance, Springer, New Zealand  
3. Flammini, F, Critical Infrastructure Security: Assessment, Prevention, De tection, Response. WIT Press, 
Southampton, UK  
4. Wang, S. Intelligent buildings and building automaton. Routledge Publication  
5. Fries, R. and Chowdhury, M. and Brummond, J. Transportation infrastructure security utilizing 
intelligent transportation systems. Joh n Wiley and Sons.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78 
 Title  Digital Twin and Asset Management  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B. Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective  
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
This course aims to introduce the cyber -physical system and computational aspect of digital twin models and 
their application in various infrastructure related issues in civil engineering.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Graduate of this course will be familiar with  
2. Application of cloud a nd edge computing, and machine learning of DT.  
3. Cyber -physical system and application of IoT in DT  
4. Elements of 3D reconstruction and use of AR & VR  
5. Standards and frameworks related to DT model building and use.  
6. Applications of DT in construction, building m anagement, smart city, transport, and water management  
 
Content  
Module I: Introduction (1 lectures)  
Relationships among digital twins in systems: hierarchical, associational, and peer -to-peer.  
 
Module II: Building Digital Twin (14 lectures)  
Fundamentals – Modeling and Simulation Techniques; 3D modeling techniques; Machine Learning for 
Modeling of Systems. Simulation using real time data from IOT devices. Cloud based software model.  
Sensors: IoT Devices; APIs; Connectivity; Deployment; Security; Interoperabi lity 
Representation: (a) Micro - 3D reconstruction: photogrammetry and structure from motion (b) Macro 3D 
reconstruction: 3D GIS and spatial modelling; Application of AR and VR; Real -time data visualization  
Decision making: Information modelling and manage ment; Decision support tools; Rule -based automation; 
Optimization.  
Illustration using example of the Digital Twin of a Smart Building  
 
Module III: Standards (5 lectures)  
Digital Twin Standards and Frameworks: Data security; Data collection ethics and principles.  
 
Module IV: Building and Construction (10)  
Construction Management: 3D model of Buildings; Automated Progress Monitoring; As -Built Vs As -
Designed Models; Monitori ng and Tracking of Workers.  
Buildings: Data acquisition: Real -time sensors, Asset management System, Building management system, 
Space management system; Data/Model integration: Building information modelling; Intelligent 
environment control & energy simul ation, Intelligent space & asset management function, Intelligent 
operation & maintenance managing function.  
Smart City: Fixed and moving sensors; Spatial data to 3D/4D models; City Information Model (GIS, BIM, 
IoT); Underground infrastructure model; Mode lling and forecast; Intelligent response; AR Models of 
infrastructure.  
 
Module V: Other Infrastructure (12)  
Energy Asset: 3D models of offshore platforms: wind and hydrocarbon; Sensors for environmental load 
detection; Digital power plant; Safety and Main tenance planning  
Transport: Real -time traffic data; Spatio -temporal demand modelling of fuel stations and EV charging points; 
Highway and bridge health monitoring; crowd simulation and management.  
Water: Hydraulic models; System -level models; hydrological assessment; Smart network; Water quality and 
supply system monitoring.  
 
Text Books  
1. R. Szeliski (2011) Ch. 12 3D reconstruction, In Book:  Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications, 
Texts in Computer Science, 303 DOI 10.1007/978 -1-84882 -935-0_7, Springer -Verlag London Limited.  
2. R. Szeliski (2011) Ch. 7 Structure from motion, In Book:  Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications, 
Texts in Computer Science, 303 DOI 10.1007/978 -1-84882 -935-0_7, Springer -Verlag London Limited.  
79 
 3. T. Luhmann, S. Robson, S  Kyle, J Boehm (2014) Close -Range Photogrammetry and 3D Imaging (2nd ed). 
De Gruter. ISBN 978 -3-11-030269 -1. 
4. B. Cyganek (2013) Object Detection and Recognition: Theory and Practice. Wiley. ISBN: 978 -0-470-97637 -
1. 
5. M. Farsi, A. Daneshkhah, A Hosseinian -Far, H. Jahankhani. (2020) Digital Twin Technologies And Smart 
Cities. Springer. ISBN 978 -3-030-18732 -3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80 
 Title  Cyber -Physical Systems for 
Infrastructure  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
This course aims at :  
1. Introducing the significance of cyber -physical systems (CPS) in civil and infrastructure engineering.  
2. Understanding the basic aspects of instrumentation and wireless communications.  
3. Applying the cyber -physical system principles to civil engineering applications  
 
 Learning Outcomes  
At the end of the course, students will be able to  
1. Realize the need of CPS,  sensors and instrumentation in civil engineering  
2. Utilize the concepts of wireless communications in major infrastructure planning  
3. Adopt various structural control systems  
4. Find innovative CPS based solutions for various civil engineering applications  
 
Contents  
Module 1 [Lectures: 8]  
Introduction to cyber -physical systems (CPS), significance of CPS in civil engineering, sensors and 
instrumentation -accelerometers, strain gauges, LVDTs, pressure cells, load cells and other sensors, sensor 
interfacing with an arduino or raspberry pi based board  
 
Module 2 [Lectures: 10]  
Wireless communications and networks, communication principles, fiber optic sensing, time domain 
reflectometry, microelectromechanical systems, particle image velocimetry, acoustic emission, w ireless 
sensor network, distributed temperature sensing  
 
Module 3 [Lectures: 12]  
Structural control systems -passive - hysteretic seismic isolation bearings, energy dissipation dampers and 
absorbers and others; active -active base isolation, active mass drive r and active bracing, semi -active - tuned 
mass dampers and other dampers; and hybrid -hybrid mass damper, hybrid base isolation and hybrid 
damper -actuator bracing control  
 
Module 4 [Lectures: 12]  
Applications in civil and infrastructure engineering -structur al health monitoring of infrastructure systems, 
subsurface profiling and stability analysis of geotechnical and geophysical systems, hydrological 
applications, transportation engineering applications, environmental and GIS applications  
 
Text Books  
1. Rajeev A . (2015). Principles of Cyber -Physical Systems. The MIT Press. ISBN: 978 -0-262-02911 -7 
2. Lee, E. A., & Seshia, S. A. (2017). Introduction to embedded systems: A cyber -physical systems approach. 
(2nd Edn). The MIT Press. ISBN -10: 0262533812  
 
Suggested articles  
1. Legatiuk, D., Dragos, K., & Smarsly, K. (2017). Modeling and evaluation of cyber ‐physical systems in 
civil engineering.  PAMM, 17(1), 807 -808. 
2. Soga, K., & Schooling, J. (2016). Infrastructure sensing. Interface focus, 6(4), 20160023.  
3. Saaed, T. E., Nikolakopoulos, G., Jonasson, J. E., & Hedlund, H. (2015). A state -of-the-art review of 
structural control systems. Journal of Vibration and Control, 21(5), 919 -937. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
81 
 Title  AI/ML in Infrastructure  
Engineering  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B. Tech ,M. Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective  
Prerequisite  Mathematics I; Mathematics II    
Objectives  
This course aims at:  
1. Comprehensive understanding of the problem settings and application of machine learning in civil and 
infrastructure engineering.  
2. Development of programming skills to execute machine learning algorithms in civil and infrastructure 
engineering.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to:  
1. Analyze problems in determinis tic and random environments.  
2. Solve challenging problems in engineering such as prediction, uncertainty quantification, damage 
assessment etc. using machine learning methods.  
 
Content  
Module 1 Introduction(Lectures: 8)  
Review of AI/ML: Fundamentals concepts  and working principle of ANN; network training; models; 
supervised and unsupervised learning networks; feed -forward backpropagation networks; generalized 
regression networks; radial basis function networks; Gaussian processes.  
Support Vector Machine and S upport Vector Regression;Spatial and Temporal Data Analysis  
 
Module 2  Deep Learning (Lectures:14)  
Overview of  Deep Networks; Building Deep Networks for Classification: Stacked Autoencoders, Linear 
Decoders with Autoencoders, Linear Decoder, Feature extr action using convolution, CNN, Pooling, 
Classification layer; Training CNN, Restricted Boltzmann Machines, Deep Belief Networks, Introduction to 
GAN, Introduction to Recurrent Networks and LSTM  
 
 
Module 3 (Lectures: 10)  
Applications in Civil and Infrastructure Engineering: Scope of applications in structural engineering, water 
resource engineering, geotechnical engineering, transportation engineering, construction engineering, 
environmental engineering, coastal and marine engineering etc.; example s for application of AI/ML in 
material modelling, traffic management and safety, foundation settlement.  
 
Module 4 (Lectures: 10)  
Other applications: Examples for application of AI/ML in structural control system identification, structural 
health monitoring , damage assessment, surrogate modelling, uncertainty quantification etc.  
 
Text Books  
1. J.-A. Goulet (2020)  Probabilistic Machine Learning for Civil Engineers, The MITPress.  
2. P.C. Deka (2020) A Primer on Machine Learning Applications in Civil Engineering, CRC  Press. ISBN 
9781138323391.  
C.M. Bishop (2006) Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer. ISBN 9780387310732.  
S. Shalev -Shwartz, S. Ben -David (2014) Understanding Machine Learning From Theory to Algorithms, 
Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781107 057135.  
Deep Learning, Goodfellow et al., MIT Press  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82 
 Title  Mathematical Modelling in 
Environmental Systems  Numb er CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B. Tech, M. Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
To provide comprehensive understanding on scope and application of mathematical modelling to 
understand environmental processes and solve related problems.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Understanding basic principles of mathematical modell ing used in solving complex environmental issues.  
 
Content  
Module 1: Environmental process and systems [Lectures 8]  
Natural and Engineered Systems, Mass Balance, Reaction Kinetics, Phase equilibrium, Steady State, Response 
time, Micro and Macro Transport P rocesses  
 
Module 2: Modelling of reactors [Lectures 10]  
Homogeneous and heterogeneous reactors; Mixed batch reactors; sequencing batch reactor, mixed flow 
reactors, plug flow reactors  
 
Module 3: Surface environment systems and Water Quality Modelling [Lectures 14]  
Fundamental of modelling aquatic systems; Lakes, Rivers river and estuaries and lake hydrodynamics; 
Stratification and eutrophication; Dissolved oxygen model for streams; Temperature models.  
 
Module 4: Air quality modeling[Lectures 10]  
Introd uction to air quality models; Meteorology; Atmospheric stability and turbulence; Gaussian plume 
model and modifications, Dispersion models, Receptor models, Acid Rain Modelling, Introduction to 
Dispersion and receptor modelling software.  
 
Text Books  
1. Weber,  W.J. Jr., Process Dynamics in Environmental Systems, John Wiley &amp; Sons Inc. (1996).  
2. Thomann, R.V., and Muller, J.A., Principles of Surface Water Quality Modelling and Control, Harper 
International Edition, N.D. (1987).  
3. Steven C.Chapra, Surface Water Q uality Modelling, The McGraw -Hill Companies,Inc., New York (2009).  
4. Deaton and Wine Brake, “Dynamic Modelling of Environmental Systems”, Wiley & sons (2002).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
83 
 Title  Intelligent Buildings  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B. Tech, M. Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
Provide knowledge of advanced intelligent building technologies, system configuration and standards, 
system operation and control.  
To provide basic understanding on the use of system integration, application of technologies and the 
operation performances.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. To understand the design and requirements for building automation systems and intelligent building 
systems  
2. Assess the impacts of using different architectures, LAN protocols/standards and Internet technologies 
in BAS design.  
3. Able to integrate and configure building environmental control, lighting control,security and safety 
control systems.  
 
Content  
Mod ule 1: Intelligent Buildings [Lectures 4]  
Introduction: Concepts, Definitions, Intelligent architecture and structure, evolution of intelligent buildings, 
IB assessment criteria  
 
Module 2: Building Automation System (BAS) and BAS communication standards [ Lectures 12]  
Digit al controller, I/P and O/P units, sensors and actuators, architecture and configuration of BAS,BAS 
outstation and central station, Programming and monitoring platforms and environment, building energy 
management functions; BAS communicati on standards(BACnet, LonWorks, Modbus, PROFIBUS, EIB) and 
their features, compatibility of different protocol standards, integration at management level  
 
Module 3: Local Area Network (LAN) and Applications of Internet technologies in BAS [Lectures 10]  
Local Area Network (LAN), protocol standards and OSI model, medium -access schemes, LAN standards, 
Ethernet, ARCnet, LonTalk, wireless technologies, ZigBee, applications of wireless technologies in BAS; 
Applications of Internet Technologies: Internet and Inter net protocols, TCP/IP, Internet LAN vs WAN, use 
of Internet technologies at different levels,BACnet/IP, convergence networks and total integration  
 
Module 4: Light Control, and Security and safety control Systems [Lectures 12]  
Light Control Systems: Compo nent, analogue and digital control, DXM512 -A, digital addressable lighting 
interface(DALI), systems based on common automation protocols, energy management and lighting control 
strategies; Security and safety control Systems: CCTV systems, analogue systems  and IP -surveillance 
systems; Access control system, different types of access control, intelligent readers and system topologies; 
Burglar alarm system, functions of burglar alarm systems; Fire alarm systems, typical fire detectors, 
conventional fire panel s, addressable fire panels.  
 
Module 5: Smart and optimal control[Lectures 6]  
Feed forward control, feedback control and adaptive control;process control and optimal control; different 
optimal control methods (rule -based control,performance -based optimal co ntrol and model -based optimal 
control.  
 
Text Books  
1. Wang, S.W. (2010) Intelligent Buildings and Building Automation, Spon Press (Taylor & Francis), London.  
2. Atkin, B. (1988) Intelligent Building, John Wiley &Sons.  
3. Leszek R. (1987) Introduction to Local Area Networks with Microcomputer Experiments, Prentice -Hall 
Inc. 
4. Levermore, G.J. (1992) Building Energy Management Systems, E&FN Spon.  
 
 
 
84 
 Title  Building Services  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B. Tech, M. Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective  
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
To provide knowledge of the operating principles and issues of different building services systems  
 
Learning Outcomes  
To develop understanding on selection criteria of suitable building services for specific requirements.  
To understand critical issues related with operation and maintenance building services systems in modern 
complex buildings.  
 
Content  
Module 1: Introduction to Building Services[Lectures 4]  
Objectives of Building services, Classification bodybuilding services, Selection of services and Application to 
different types of buildings;Building as a whole, Energy, heat transfer and thermal comfort, Natural and 
Artificial Lighting; Ventilation and it s types; Condensation in Buildings  
 
Module 2: Piped Services[Lectures 14]  
Introduction, Hot and Cold water: Direct and Indirect system, protectionist, valves, water storage, Pipe size 
and resistance, hydraulics and fluid flow,circulation; Sanitary fitting s, discharge and waste systems; Fire 
prevention and control:Fire Fighting equipment, Methods of fighting fire, Combustibility of materials, 
Structural elements and fire resistance, Fire escape routes, ventilation and control; Gas and storage:Control 
and sa fety features, Purging, Flue gas analysis, Gas consumption and pipe sizing,Ventilation requirement; 
Solid waste disposal: Collection and removal, onsite -processing and disposal methods, Guidelines for Solid 
waste and Electronic waste management,Disposal pr actices: landfill, Vermi -compost, Incineration, pyrolysis; 
Drainage: Surface -water drainage and Below -ground treatment  
 
Module 3: Mechanical services[Lectures 6]  
Introduction, Lifts, elevators and escalators, dumbwaiters,conveyors, air conditioning, and t heir types  
 
Module 4: Space Heating and Cooling[Lectures 6]  
Types of heating: Open fires, stoves, boilers, radiators;Flow and Ceiling Heating, Warm air systems and air 
conditioning, Geothermal and heat pumps, solar energy  
 
Module 5: Electrical Installati ons and Acoustics[Lectures 12]  
Electricity generation, supply and distribution,Circuit design, Cable capacity and voltage drop, Overloads 
and Safety cut -outs. Testing,Telecommunications installations; Acoustic principles, Sound and Pressure 
levels, pressur e levels in different zones, Sound transmission, Noise rating  
 
Text Books  
1. Chadderton D. V. (2007) Building Services Engineering, Fifth Edition, Taylor & Francis, London and New 
York.  
2. Hall, F. ; Greeno, R. (2007) Building Services, Fourth Edition, Butterwo rth-Heinemann, Elsevier.  
3. Harrison, H. W. &amp; Trotman, P. M. (2000) Building Services: Performance, Diagnosis, Maintenance, 
Repair and Avoidance of defects, London: CRC.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
85 
 Title  Environmental Biotechnology and Bioremediation  Number  BBL7XX0  
Department  Bioscience and Bioengineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-2 [4]  
Offered for  B. Tech, M.Tech, M.Tech. -Ph.D. [CIE]  Type  Program 
Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
Acquaint students with the way wastes/waste waters as well as toxic wastes are treated.  
Teach methods pertaining to sustainable waste water recycling  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Acquaint students with the way wastes/wastewaters as well as toxic wastes are treated.  
2. Teach methods pertaining to sustainable wastewater recycling  
 
Content  
Introduction: Basics of Microbiology, Stoichiometry and Bacterial energetics [Lectures 5].  
Kinetics and Reactors: Microbial Kinetics and Biofilm kinetics, Reactor types, Mass balances [Lectures 7].  
The activated sludge process: Characteristics of activated sludge, Proc ess configurations, Design and 
operating criteria, aeration systems and sludge separation [Lectures 5].  
Nitrification and denitrification: Bacterial physiology and basic process including biofilm and hybrid 
[Lectures 4].  
Phosphorus removal: Normal phosph orus uptake into biomass, precipitation and enhanced biological 
removal [Lectures 4].  
Drinking water treatment: Aerobic biofilm processes to remove biological instability, biodegradation and 
denitrification [Lectures 4].  
Anaerobic treatment by methanogen esis: Reactor configurations, Process chemistry and Microbiology, 
Process kinetics [Lectures 4].  
Detoxification of hazardous chemicals: Molecular recalcitrance, Biodegradation of problem environmental 
contaminants [Lectures 4].  
Bioremediation: Scope and c haracteristics of contaminants, Biodegradability, Treatability studies, 
Engineering strategies for bioremediation, Biotechnological and genetics engineering approaches -creations 
of superbugs [Lectures 4].  
 
Laboratory  
Determining empirical formula for was tewater based on elemental analysis, Determining COD degradation 
rate using different electron acceptors, Determining the microbial growth rate in wastewater under 
oxic/anoxic conditions, Determining the % COD removal using batch & continuous process for s imulated 
wastewater, Determining the effect of initial microbial load on COD removal rate, Determining the effect of 
C/N ratio on COD removal rate, determine the sludge bulking/good settling sludge, Performing biological 
nitrification, Biological denitrifi cation, Biofilm process for water treatment, Setting up bio electrochemical 
system for simultaneous C, N removal, Acclimatizing microbial consortia for treatment of hazardous waste, 
Setting up an in situ bioremediation system  
 
Text Books  
Environmental Biot echnology: Principles and Applications, Rittmann, B.E., McCarty, P.L., Tata McGraw 
Hill, 2001.  
 
Reference Books  
Bioprocess Engineering: Basic Concepts, Shuler, M., Kargi, F., Second Edition Prentice Hall, 2002.  
General Microbiology, Stanier, R. Y., W.H. Freeman and Co, 2009.  
 
Online course material  
Gargi Singh, Applied Environmental Microbiology, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Civil 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, http://nptel.ac.in/ courses/105107173/  
 
 
 
 
86 
 Title  Environmental Hydrology  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-2 [4]  
Offered for  B. Tech, M.Tech, M.Tech. -Ph.D. [CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
1. To provide qualitative understanding of hydrologic processes.  
2. To inculcate basic steps of quantifying hydrologic parameters.  
3. To enable design structures for water and soil management.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in :  
1. Enable to develop and design flood management solutions, wetlands and landscapes.  
2. Ability to design hydraulic structures and processes  
3. Able to predict and assess the impact of precipitation, and effectively use water for different services 
such as in a griculture  
 
Content  
Hydrological cycle, climate and society: Water food industry nexus, transport from precipitation to 
groundwater, modelling hydrologic cycles and basic hydrologic data [Lectures 5].  
Precipitation: Forms of precipitation, its causes, mea surement of precipitation, data of precipitation, 
precipitation trends and frequencies, depth -duration -frequency of precipitation, Probability of precipitation 
occurrence [Lectures 7].  
Infiltration and soil Moisture Management: Soil properties, soil -water  balance, infiltration and its estimation, 
evaporation and its estimation, evapo -transpiration (ET) and its measurement and estimation, Crop 
referenced ET [Lectures 7].  
Runoff: Why Runoff, Factor affecting Runoff and flow models, watershed, Hydrograph and  its components, 
peak runoff and stormwater runoff, flood and its estimation, catchment character, agricultural and sub -
surface drainage [Lectures 5].  
Streams : Streams, Temporal and spatial streams, Stream Biota and Order, Measurement of stage and 
Veloci ty, stream stability and sediment transport, Meander migration, Flood plains, Stream Classification - 
Mountain Stream and Rosen stream methods, Channel evolution, Losing and gaining streams Unit 
hydrograph, flood frequency, Gumbel and Type III distribution studies [Lectures 8].  
Floods and Hydraulic Control Structures: open channel flows, Darcy Weisbach and Manning equations, 
weirs, flumes, conduits, culverts, riffles, pools and runs [Lectures 5].  
Hydrology of Wetlands and in Ground Water: Detention and Ret ention ponds, Agricultural impacts and 
Brackish systems, Filter Strips, Riparian Buffers and Ditches. Leachate impact, subsurface water, aquifers, 
wells, recharge, ground water mapping [Lectures 5].  
Experimental Outline - Modelling  
Use the local historical precipitation data of Jodhpur and find the probability distribution function, which 
can effectively predict it.  
Use the local precipitation data as an input to derive synthetic mass curves. Further, utilize the data to 
calculate runoff and land use. Use HydroCAD v.9.0.  
Model a drainage management scenario of a porous tile of 10 cm diameter running at the boundary b etween 
1ft loamy soil from the atmosphere and 1ft sandy soil below the porous tile. The ponding is 1ft height in an 
area of 1 acre. Use Ansys Fluent and MicroFEM, and compare the results.  
Create a new numerical groundwater flow model with MODFLOW -2005 / M ODFLOW -NWT, having a 
confined aquifer at 80 m depth from soil surface. Import the data (shapefiles, images, spreadsheets) from 
crop.xls; Use uniform percolation of 1ft per acre as inflow, which can be manual input data to MODFLOW; 
link packages with their parameters; run a simulation; visualize and export the results.  
Use Hydrus 2D to simulate the water potential about the 25 cm larger and 15 cm smaller external diameter 
of a porous frustum of 0.25 cm thickness leaching out saline solution of 2000 ppm (bra ckish irrigation water) 
and train the model using a Python program to handle different concentrations of salinity. Input training 
data from the field experiments collected after soil analysis at Site C, IIT Jodhpur.  
Using the results of water potential fr om Experiment 5 and estimate net infiltration below the root zone if 
the crop is Okra. Use Crop ET reference values from Frangmeier et al. 2015. Use INFIL 3.0 for the 
simulations.  
87 
 Derive approximate flow effectiveness of a trapezoidal notch of 2.5 m base and 4.5 m surface with a height 
of 1m using OpenFlow Flow Master and compare the results with Channel Design and Channel Studio.  
Use EPANET to evaluate water distribution of a community of 200 households with an average 
consumption of 300 litres of water per day living at a height of 20 m from ground level. These 200 households 
are supplied water from a 50 m high tank using a given distribution plan. Refer lecture notes for the 
approximate length of 200 m. Find the energy expense for distributing the water  if the water tank is having 
15 m diameter and 10 m height.  
 
Text Books  
1. Environmental Hydrology, Andy D. Ward, Stanley W. Trimble, Suzette R. Burckhard, John G. Lyon, 
CRC Press, Third Edition, ISBN -13: 978 -1466589414, ISBN -10: 1466589418, 2016.  
2. Engineerin g Hydrology K Subramanya, Fourth Edition, McGraw Hill Education (India), Pvt, Ltd., New 
Delhi ISBN 1 -25-902997 -2, 978 -1-25902997 -4, 2013.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
88 
 Title  Introduction to Structural Health 
Monitoring  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech. [CIE]  Type  PE 
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
This course aims at:  
1. Fundamental understanding of the monitoring systems for estimating structural health.  
2. Development of time and frequency domain methods to estimate damage in the structures.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
 Students will have the ability to:  
1. Assess the damage in the existing structures and their components using time and modal based methods.  
2. Design the layout of the sensors and hardware for acquiring the experimental data from the structure.  
 
Contents  
Module 1  
Review of structural dynamics:  Development of equation of motion for multi degree of freedom system; 
solution methods; response in free and forced vibration; ty pes of damping; computation of vibration 
properties, natural time period and modes. (Lectures: 9)  
Module 2  
Concept of structural health monitoring (SHM): Introduction to damage; passive and active SHM; non -
destructive evaluation (NDE) and SHM; structural h ealth management. (Lectures: 4)  
Vibration -based techniques for SHM: Basic concepts; data evaluation and assessment; structural damage 
assessment – diagnostic levels and methods; modelling of damaged structural elements; modal assurance 
criterion (MAC); dam age localization and quantification. (Lectures: 8)  
Module 3  
Frequency domain decomposition (FDD); time -domain damage detection methods - Kalman filters, 
autoregressive (AR) and autoregressive with exogenous input (ARX) models. (Lectures: 9)  
Module 4  
Miscel laneous topics: ANN and statistical pattern recognition approach to SHM; predictive health 
monitoring; Bayesian model updating; introduction to piezo -electric materials; electro -mechanical 
impedance (EMI) technique; fundamentals of restoration and rehabili tation. (Lectures: 8)  
SHM system design: Data handling - data acquisition systems and transmission; processing of recorded 
data; evaluate sources of variability; fibre -optics sensors and smart sensing; sensor optimization, placement 
and layout design. (Lec tures: 4)  
Text Books  
1. D. Balageas, C. -P. Fritzen, A. Güemes (2006)  Structural Health Monitoring, ISTE Ltd. ISBN 
9781905209019.  
2. C.R. Farrar, K. Worden (2012) Structural Health Monitoring: A Machine Learning Perspective, Wiley. 
ISBN 9781119994336.  
3. H.-P. Chen (2018) Structural Health Monitoring of Large Civil Engineering Structures, Wiley Blackwell. 
ISBN 9781119166627.  
4. C.-K. Soh, Y. Yang, S. Bhalla (2014) Smart Materials in Structural Health Monitoring, Control and 
Biomechanics, Springer. ISBN 97836 42244629.  
 
Additional reference  
Structural Health Monitoring (2018) by Prof. Srinivasan Chandrasekaran on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/114/106/114106046/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
89 
 Title  Infrastructure Planning and Management   Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-2 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
This course aims at:  
1. Introducing basic principles and concepts of infrastructure planning and management.  
2. Realizing the real -world risks and challenges in managing infrastructure.  
3. Introducing the infrastructure planning process as well as the state of infrastructure across sectors in India.  
 
Learning Out comes  
Students will have the ability to  
1. Analyze systematically the various risks that plague infrastructure projects.  
2. Develop critical thinking on a variety of novel solutions or fixes which aids in execution infrastructure 
projects better.  
3. Device methods  to analyze the infrastructure projects based on various risks.  
4. Apply the design methodologies to the real world case studies.  
5. Design innovative methods for long lasting infrastructure and understand the successful project delivery 
strategies.  
 
Contents  
Module 1 [Lectures: 6]  
Introduction, infrastructure scenario in India, transportation, power and telecom sectors, urban and rural 
infrastructure in India, road infrastructure development in India, rural roads development in India -
opportunities and challenge s 
 
Module 2 [Lectures: 8]   
Infrastructure economics and finance,  project structuring and risk allocation in project finance, Public -Private 
Partnership (PPP) for infrastructure - case studies,  risk management in infrastructure projects, term sheet 
developme nt, economic and social environmental risk in infrastructure.  
 
Module 3 [Lectures: 8]  
Project Governance, public sector governance, strategies for governing against infrastructure project 
turbulence, the governance model, data –base management, actor mappin g and social network analysis, fair 
process and negotiations, design thinking, life cycle and benefit cost analysis, pavement preservation and 
road asset management system.  
 
Module 4 [Lectures: 10]  
Maintenance of infrastructure, case studies of infrastructure, privatization in infrastructure projects, road 
information system for maintenance management of road infrastructure projects, flexibilities and options on 
projects, module flexibilities in projects, tourism infrastructure projects - implemen tation on PPP Format.  
 
Module 5 [Lectures: 10]  
Innovative infrastructure financing, urban infrastructure needs in India and funding options, new and 
innovative materials for long lasting road infrastructure, green highways –recycling technology, durable ro ad 
infrastructure –options and recent developments, polycentric governance and incomplete design, successful 
project delivery strategies.   
 
Text Books  
1. Goodman AS, Hastak M (2006). Infrastructure planning handbook: planning, engineering, and economics. 
New  York: ASCE Press.  
2. Miller R, Lessard DR (2001). The strategic management of large engineering projects: Shaping institutions, 
risks, and governance. MIT press.  
 
Additional reference  
Infrastructure Planning and Management (2018) by Prof. Ashwin Mahalingam N PTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/106/105106188/   
90 
 Title  Introduction to Power Infrastructure 
Engineering  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  B. Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
This course aims at:  
1.   An overview of the key renewable energy infrastructure technologies in wind, hydroelectric, tidal 
and solar.  
2.   Introduction of fundamentals  of piping, transmission and distribution systems in the power 
infrastructure.  
  
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to:  
1. Conceptualize and use the knowledge on different civil engineering components for executing 
renewable power infrastructure  projects.  
2. Design and develop smart grid networks for transmission and distribution of the energy in rural and 
urban sectors.  
  
Contents  
Module 1  
Introduction to power infrastructure:  Types of electrical generation; generation system architecture; 
power pl ant planning and design.  (Lectures: 3)  
Hydroelectric infrastructure: Site selection; classification; hydrographs; storage and pondage; essential 
elements; selection of turbines.  (Lectures: 6)  
 
Module 2  
Tidal energy infrastructure: Fundamentals of tide; wav e theory, loading and energy;  operating principle 
- oscillating device; turbine characteristics; devices; moorings and anchors; foundations.  (Lectures: 6)  
Wind energy infrastructure: Offshore and onshore wind; properties of wind; wind resource assessment; 
wind turbine blades; wind turbines in grid; wind projects.  (Lectures: 6)  
 
Module 3  
Solar energy infrastructure: Basics of solar PV, fundamentals of the design of solar energy fields; 
concentrated solar power plant; solar water heating systems.  (Lectures: 6) 
Introduction to pipelines in power infrastructure:   Materials; pressure design of piping; fittings; layout 
and supports; flexibility and fatigue; vibration.  (Lectures: 7)  
 
Module 4  
Smart grid, transmission and distribution: Grid resilience; environmenta l performance; operational 
efficiencies; network architecture; transmission systems; wide area monitoring, protection and control, 
transmission and distribution architecture; microgrids; vulnerability; peak load shifting and grid 
storage.  (Lectures: 8)  
  
Reference Books/Reports  
1. L.F. Drbal, P.G. Boston, K.L. Westra, R.B. Erickson (1996) Power Plant Engineering, Kluwer Academic 
Publishers. ISBN 9781461380474.  
2. S. Borlase (2013) Smart Grid Infrastructure, Technology, and Solutions, CRC Press. ISBN 
9781439829103 . 
3. G.A. Antaki  (2005)  Piping and Pipeline Engineering Design, Construction, Maintenance, Integrity, 
and Repair, Taylor & Francis. ISBN 0824709640.  
4. P. Jain (2011) Wind Energy Engineering, McGraw -Hill. ISBN 9780071714778.  
5. D. Greaves, G. Iglesias (2018) Wave a nd Tidal Energy, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. ISBN 9781119014454.  
6. S. A. Kalogirou (2009) Solar Energy Engineering Processes and Systems, Elsevier. ISBN 
9780123745019.  
 
 
91 
 Title  Thermal and Nuclear Power Infrastructure 
Engineering  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B.Tech. [CIE]  Type  PE 
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
This course aims at:  
1. An overview of the energy infrastructure technologies in thermal and nuclear systems.  
2. Introducing the waste generated from the above systems and its respective utilization in civil and 
infrastructure engineering.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Students will have the ability to:  
1. Conceptualize and use the knowledge on different civil engineering components for executing power 
infrastru cture projects.  
2. Design and develop cooling networks and chimneys for power plants.  
 
Contents  
Module 1  
Overview of power plant planning and design. (Lectures: 2)  
Thermal energy infrastructure: Plant configuration; emission reduction; repair; maintenance; co oling; 
reliability and risk assessment. (Lectures: 11)  
 
Module 2  
Chimney: Design of chimney; construction and maintenance. (Lectures: 5)  
Waste management and fly ash: Power plant waste – fly ash; chemical composition and classification; 
disposal and reuse;  applications in cement, soil stabilization, pavement construction, geo polymers, bricks 
etc.; environmental issues and exposure concerns; flue gas desulfurization. (Lectures: 10)  
 
Module 3  
Nuclear energy infrastructure: Policy and regulations; economics and financing of nuclear power plants; 
nuclear technology selection and project implementation; fuel supply, radioactive waste and management; 
issues; facilities and basic infrastructure. (Lectures: 14)  
 
Reference Books/Reports  
1. L.F. Drbal, P.G. Boston, K.L . Westra, R.B. Erickson (1996) Power Plant Engineering, Kluwer Academic 
Publishers. ISBN 9781461380474.  
2. Basic Infrastructure for a Nuclear Power Project (2006) Technical Report, IAEA. ISBN 9201085060.  
3. G.F.M. de Souza (2012) Thermal Power Plant Performance Analysis, Springer. ISBN 9781447123088.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
92 
 Title  Infrastructure planning and design for 
rail and air transport  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B. Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
In this course the students will learn to plan and design the elements of rail and air  transportation system 
and will understand their operational principles.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
At the end of the course, the student should be able to:  
Understand various elements of rail and air transportation systems  
Forecast travel demand for these transportation systems  
Understand the layout, design, and operation of these transportation systems  
Conceptually design a transpo rt system compatible with the surrounding land use  
Understand the mobility and accessibility of these systems.  
 
Content  
MODULE I: [No. of lectures – 12] 
Railway operational system, traffic forecast and surveys, components of railway track and rolling stock , 
railway alignment, geometric design elements, traction, safety measures, track laying, inspection and 
maintenance, track drainage, bridge maintenance, classification of renewal works, track renewal trains.  
 
MODULE II: No. Of lectures - 8 
Signaling and i nterlocking – objectives and classification, Site selection and facilities for railway stations 
and yards, High Speed Railways - Modernization of railways, effect of high -speed track, vehicle 
performance on track, high speed ground transportation system, ba llast less track, elevated railways, 
underground and tube railways.  
 
MODULE III: [No. of lectures -10] 
Airport system planning, Airport strategic and master planning, Air Traffic demand forecasting, Airline 
operations and economics, Airspace and airport cap acity and delay, From planning to construction, Airfield 
layout planning and design  
 
MODULE IV: [No. of lectures - 12] 
Passenger terminal planning, Air cargo facilities and logistic planning, Airport ground access, 
Environmental planning and management, Air port noise management, Airport land use compatibility 
planning, Planning for unmanned aircraft system and future air mobility.  
 
Text Books  
Satish Chandra and M. Agrawal, Railway Engineering, Second Edition, Oxford University Press  
Norman J. Ashford, Saleh Mumayiz, Paul H. Wright. Airport Engineering: Planning, Design, and 
Development of 21st Century Airports. John Wiley and Sons Inc.  
 
Additional reference  
C. Venkatramaiah. Transportation Engineering: Volume II: Railways, Airports, Docks and Harbors, Bridges  
and Tunnels. Universities Press (India) Private Ltd.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
93 
 Title  Infrastructure planning and design of ports and 
harbours  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B. Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective 
(PE)  
Prerequisite  --   
Objectives  
In this course the students will learn to plan and design the elements of ports and harbours for water 
transportation.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
At the end of the course, the student should be able to:  
1. Understand various elements of ports and harbour infrastructures  
2. Forecast travel demand water transportation systems  
3. Understand the layout, design, and operation of ports and harbours  
4. Conceptually design a port and harbour system compatible with the surrounding land use 
 
Content  
MODULE I: [No. of lectures -12] 
Fundamentals -Tide and current conditions inside harbor, water circulation, breakwaters, jetties and quay 
walls; mooring, berthing and ship motion inside the port. Port layout, continuation of port layouts, port 
planning, harbour layout, Site characteristics, Bathymetric survey, Wave rose diagram  
 
MODULE II: [No. of lectures -15] 
Design issues of Sea port layout, Design of Port Infrastructures, Design of breakwaters, berm breakwater, 
Dredging and methods of disposal , Berthing structures - loads, analysis, and design, mooring berthing and 
seismic forces, Slipway, drydock,floating dock, shiplift, soil structure interaction, Ground improvement 
techniques  
 
MODULE III: [No.of lectures -7] 
Planning multipurpose port terminal s. Operation - Allowable wave conditions for cargo handling and 
human safety on quays and breakwaters, forecasting / nowcasting of wave and current conditions for port 
operations  
 
MODULE IV: [No. of lectures -8] 
VTMS and management of computerized container  terminal, safety & environment. Maintenance of 
waterways, construction of environmentally engineered banks, Impact of possible climate change scenarios, 
sustainable development strategies for cities and ports.  
Text Books  
Gaythwaite, J. Design of Marine Fa cilities: Engineering for port and harbor structures. 3rd Edition, ASCE 
Press  
Richand L. Silister, Coastal Engineering Volume I &amp; II, Elsevier Publishers  
Tsinker, G. P. Handbook of Port and Harbour Engineering: Geotechnical and structural aspects, 
International Thomson Publishing  
 
Additional reference  
C. Venkatramaiah. Transportation Engineering: Volume II: Railways, Airports, Docks and Harbors, Bridges 
and Tunnels. Universities Press (India) Private Ltd.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
94 
 Title  IT and Telecom Infrastructure  Number  CI4XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B. Tech [CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
The course will help students to understand the fundamentals of IT and telecommunication infrastructure 
and their integration for sustainable livelihood.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
At the end of the course, the student should be able to:  
1. Understand the components and functions of telecommunication.  
2. Understand the preliminaries of telecom tower constru ction  
3. Understand the fundamental elements of IT infrastructure such as networks and servers, storage, remote 
access, and  network security  
4. Understand the integration of information and communication technology for urban services  
 
Content  
MODULE I: [No. of lectures – 14] 
Telecommunication – definition, use, functions, and components, site surveys - raw land tower site survey 
and boundary survey, classification of telecommunication towers, Telecommunication signals, Design of 
towers – configuration, analysis o f loads, design of tower members, design of foundation, tower erection, 
transmission lines construction, operation and maintenance of distribution systems. Overview of - the role 
of telecommunication in IT industry, telecom network management, and wireless  and mobile 
communication)  
 
MODULE II: [No. of lectures – 13] 
IT infrastructure – components of IT infrastructure, Internet and world wide web, design, planning, and 
implementation of networks and servers, storage management , Backup / Restore Methodology,  Remote 
Access, Control, Administration, Introduction to -Network security, cloud computing, cyber -physical 
system, Preliminary concepts on  Big data  
 
MODULE III: [No. of lectures – 15] 
Definition and concepts of Smart city, Intelligent city, Digital city,  and Ecity. Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) in Urban services : Specific interests - Emergency response, water and 
electrical utilities, sewage treatment, Health, safety, and security; General interest: Public service and 
governance, Urban a dministration, Urban infrastructure planning  
 
Text Books  
1. Steve Morris, Up the Tower: The complete Guide to Tower Construction, Champion Radio Products  
2. Brian W. Smith, Communication Structures, Thomas Telford publications  
 
Additional reference  
1. Graham, S. and Marvin, S.  Planning Cybercities? Integrating Telecommunications into Urban 
Planning, The town planning review, 70(1), Liverpool University Press  
2. ICT in Urban services, Compendium of global good practices, National Institute of Urban affairs, 
http://pearl.niua.org/sites/default/files/books/GP -GL1_ICT.pdf  
3. Fundamentals of telecommunication. https://www.net.t -labs.tu -
berlin.de/teaching/computer_networking/documents/telecomm_fundamentals.pdf  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
95 
 Title  Green Building and Sustainable 
Materials  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  B. Tech, M.Tech, M.Tech. -Ph.D. 
[CIE]  Type  Program Elective (PE)  
Prerequisite  -   
Objectives  
Objectives of this course are:  
To introduce elements of green building construction and use of sustainable materials.  
To familiarize students with different national and international green performance ratings.  
To teach students methods of carbon footprint reduction and increase in energy efficiency of a building.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
A graduate of this course will have a thorough idea of:  
National and international green building assessment system and requirements.  
Green building design elements and use of sustainable materials.  
Techniques to reduce the carbon footprint of a green building.  
Management of hydrological cycle , treatment of waste, and maintenance of indoor air quality.  
Green building economics, business plan, and management.  
 
Content  
Introduction to green building: Rationale for high -performance green building; green building progress 
and obstacles; trends in high -performance green building; the green building movement. (Lectures: 3)  
 
Ecological design: design vs ecological design; contemporary ecological design; future ecological design; 
thermodynamics: limits on recycling and the dissipation of materials (Lec tures: 3)  
 
Green building assessment: US green building assessment system; international green building assessment 
system; performance assessment. (Lectures: 3)  
 
LEED building rating system: history of LEED; structure of the LEED suite of building assessme nt systems; 
LEED credentials; the LEED process; LEED categories. (Lectures: 3)  
 
The Green Globes building assessment system: the Green Globes process; Green Globes verification and 
certification; structure of the ANSI/GBI 01 -2010 standard; the Green Globes  professional and Green Globes 
Assessor. (Lectures: 3)  
 
Green building design process: conventional vs green building delivery systems; executing the green 
building project; the integrated design progress; role of Charrette in the design process; green bui lding 
documentation requirements. (Lectures: 3)  
 
Sustainable site and landscape: land and landscape approaches for green buildings; sustainable landscapes; 
enhancing ecosystems; stormwater management; low -impact development; heat island mitigation; light 
trespass and pollution reduction; sustainable site initiative. (Lectures: 3)  
 
Energy and carbon footprint reduction: building energy issues; high -performance building energy design 
strategy; passive design strategy; building envelope; internal load reductio n; active mechanical system; 
water -heating system; electrical power systems; innovative energy optimization strategies; renewable 
energy systems; fuel cells; smart buildings and energy management systems; ozone -depleting chemicals in 
HVAC&R systems; reduci ng carbon footprint of the built environment. (Lectures: 4)  
 
Built environment hydrological cycle: global water resource depletion; hydrological cycle terminology; 
high -performance building hydrological cycle strategy; designing the high -performance buildi ng 
hydrological cycle; water budget rules of thumb; sustainable stormwater management; landscaping water 
efficiency. (Lectures: 4)  
 
96 
 Closing materials loops: distinguishing between green building products and green building materials; 
LCA of building materi als and products; environmental product declaration; materials and product 
certification systems; emerging construction materials and products; design for deconstruction. (Lectures: 
4) 
 
Indoor environmental quality: IEQ issues; design; main components of i ntegrated IEQ design; emission 
from building materials; economic benefits of good indoor environmental quality. (Lectures: 3)  
 
Construction operations and commissioning: site protection planning; indoor air quality during 
construction; construction materia ls management; construction and demolition waste management. 
(Lectures: 3)  
 
Green building economics: the business case for high -performance green building; the economics of green 
building; quantifying green building benefits. (Lectures: 3)  
 
Text Books  
Charles J. Kibert (2013). Sustainable Construction. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978 -1-118-33013 -5 
J. Newman and Ban Sang Choo (2003) Advanced Concrete Technology -Constituent Materials (1st Ed), 
Elsevier. ISBN 9780080489988.  
S. Kubba (2010) LEED Practices, Cert ification, and Accreditation Handbook (1st Ed) Elsevier. ISBN 
9780080958590.  
 
Additional reference  
Ministry of Power, Energy Conservation Building Code 2018, Revised Version, Bureau of Energy Efficiency, 
2018,  
Indian Building Congress, Practical Handbook o n Energy Conservation in Buildings, 1 st ed. Nabhi 
Publication, 2008.  
TERI -Griha’s Green Design practices ( www.teriin.org/bcsd/griha/griha.htm ) 
Sartori, I., and Hestnes, A. G. “Energy use in the  life cycle of conventional and low -energy buildings: A 
review article”, Energy and Buildings., 20, 249 -257.2007  
Green Building Basics, California Integrated Waste Management Board 
(www.ciwmb.ca.gov/GREENBUILDING/Basics.htm#What ) 
Catarina Thormark. “A low energy building in a life cycle —its embodied energy, energy need for operation 
and recycling potential”, Building and Environment., 37, 429 -435.2001.  
 
Online course Material  
“NOC :Energy Efficiency, Acoustics and Daylighting in Building” by Prof. B. Bhattacharjee on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/102/105102175/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
97 
 Title  Smart Infrastructure: Design and 
Simulation  Number  CI5XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  0-0-4 [2]  
Offered for  B.Tech  [CIE]  Type  Program Compulsory 
(PC) for specialization  
Prerequisite  -   
Design/Simulation experiments  
Hands -on-experience and response monitoring of instrumentation such as sensors, accelerometers, strain 
gauges, LVDTs, fiber optics, smart sensors, data acquisition systems etc.  
Monitoring instrumentation placement and layout design in the campus pipeline system through optimal 
sensor placement (OSP) approach  
Beam -column damage identif ication and analysis through digitized sensors and FE simulation (Ansys LS -
DYNA)  
Health monitoring and fatigue analysis of scaled infrastructure models in the laboratory using Machine 
Learning, Artificial Intelligence techniques and Ansys Mechanical simula tion 
Vibration monitoring of campus entities using High -speed visual measuring system  
Digital twin development of built environment using Ansys Twin Builder  
Safety and security planning of campus entities using Ansys Medini Analyze  
Simulation of multimodal  transportation system using VISSIM  
Development of driver behaviour models in the context of Indian traffic using Ansys VRXPERIENCE  
Planning and monitoring of power infrastructure in the campus  
Automated water distribution system planning for the campus  
Planning of automated -digitized environmental aspects (solid waste management and air pollution control) 
for the campus  
Spatial data analysis and remote sensing application for land use optimization for smart city design through 
simulations (ArcGIS, etc.)  
Smart city and green field city design through data -driven simulation (Programs -Urban Sim, SimCities, 
Siradel, etc.)  
 
Text Books  
Raj, P., & Raman, A. C. (2015). Intelligent Cities: Enabling Tools and Technology. CRC Press.  
Meneguette, R. I., De Grande, R. E ., & Loureiro, A. A. (2018). Intelligent transport system in smart cities. 
Springer: Cham, Switzerland.  
Deakin, Mark; Al Waer, Husam (Eds.) (2012), From Intelligent to Smart Cities, Routledge, Taylor & Francis, 
USA and Canada  
 
Articles  
Berglund, E. Z., Mon roe, J. G., Ahmed, I., Noghabaei, M., Do, J., Pesantez, J. E., ... & Levis, J. (2020). Smart 
Infrastructure: A Vision for the Role of the Civil Engineering Profession in Smart Cities. Journal of 
Infrastructure Systems, 26(2), 03120001.  
ASCE. (2017) Infrastructure Report Card: A comprehensive assessment of America’s infrastructure. Reston, 
VA: ASCE.  
Li, L., Aoyama, T., Takaki, T., Ishii, I., Yang, H., Umemoto, C., ... & Fujiwara, A. (2017). Vibration 
distribution measurement using a high -speed multi t hread active vision. In 2017 IEEE International 
Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics (AIM) (pp. 400 -405). IEEE.  
Manual, A. U. S. (2016). Ansys user’s manual. SAS IP inc.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
98 
 Title  Transmission Infrastructure  Number  EE7XX0  
Department  Electrical Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3–0–0 [3]  
Offered for  M. Tech, M. Tech -PhD, Ph.D  Type  SSE  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
1. Provide knowledge related to infrastructure in various modes of power transmission such as 
underground, marine, and overhead.  
2. Provide knowledge related to design, installation, and maintenance of the transmission infrastructure.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.  Select appropriate transmission infrastructure needed f or transmission of electric power based on various 
factors.  
2.  Design, install, and maintain power transmission infrastructure.  
 
Contents  
Overhead transmission lines: Overhead line routing, aerial survey, ground survey, overhead line 
foundations, soil inv estigation, foundation types, foundation design, support structures, steel lattice towers, 
tower testing, overhead line fittings, suspension clamps, sag adjusters, bi -metal connectors, conductor 
loads, lightning, surge diverters, insulator arcing horn co -ordination, aerodynamic phenomena, 
transmission voltage level clearances, wooden poles, distribution voltage clearances, overhead line 
maintenance, environmental considerations (18 lectures)  
 
Underground cables: Types of cable, insulation and conductor mate rials, air cable ampacity, underground 
cable ampacity, short circuit and its effect, thermal & electromechanical stresses, cable termination and 
joints, pulling the cable, installing cable racks, conduits, cable supports, cable tray and trenches, cable 
testing, steps for fault location, fault location methods (12 lectures)  
 
Marine cables: Introduction, marine survey, cable routing, cable system design parameters, cable design 
parameters, cable accessories, cable installation, cable materials & accessories, cable joints and terminations, 
inspections and testing, maintenance and failure investigation (12 lectures)  
 
Text Books  
1. Kiessling,F., Nefzger,P., Nolasco,J.F., Kaintzyk,U., (2003), Overhead Power Lines Planning Design 
Construction, 4th Edition, Springer  
2. Ganguli,S.K., Kohli,V., (2016), Power Cable Technology, CRC Press  
3. Worzyk,T., (2009), Submarine Power Cables Design, Installation, Repair, Environmental Aspects, 
Springer  
4. Bayliss,C., Hardy,B., (2012), Transmission and Distribution Electrical Engin eering, 4th Edition, Newnes 
publications  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
99 
 Title  Fate of Chemicals in the Environment  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering   3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  M.Tech, M.Tech. -Ph.D. [CIE]  Type  Specialization Stream 
Elective  
Prerequisite  Chemistry, Flow Mechanics, Soils    
Objectives  
1. To provide a qualitative understanding of what happens to chemicals as it enters an environment.  
2. To inculcate the dynamics of chemicals as they interact with different phases during their transport.  
3. To inculcate different ways of chemical transport.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. To enable identification of mass transport and distinguish various chemical transformations.  
2. Able to predict mobilizing and spreading of chemicals in a media or material or a  volume of air  
3. Relate the general fate of contaminants when passing through water, air and soil due to forces such as 
precipitation.   
 
Contents  
Basics of Mass transport: Continuity Thought of Chemicals; Earth’s Environmental Compartments, 
Lavosier species , Mass Balances, history of mass conservation, basic concept of chemical fate  [Lectures 6].  
 
Modes of Transport: Ficks law of diffusion, films and finite fluid layers, dispersion, advection of solutes 
and particles in fluids. Turbulent diffusion, film theo ry, penetration, surface renewal, and boundary layer 
thought [Lectures 6].  
 
Transformation and Phases: Phases, Partitioning coefficients, Aspects of Equilibrium with Dissociating 
chemicals, Partitioning in multi -component systems, Basics of fugacity -Mackay  models [Lectures 6].  
 
Soils: Soil and Its Functions, soil nutrients and contamination, Diffusion/advection equation for transport 
in soil, infiltration and leaching, evaporation and capillary transport,  Analytical Solutions for Vertical 
Transport in Soil  [Lectures 6].  
 
Precipitation and Streams: Land use, Hydrological Data, Hydrograph, Analytical Steady -State Surface 
Water Model, Runoff, Streams, Mass Balances and Plug flow [Lectures 6].  
 
Surface Waters: Wetlands, constructed systems, Mass balances on wetland systems, Nutrient loading 
criteria, Streeter -Phelps Equation, Waste Load allocation and Dissolved gases in river waters [Lectures 6].  
 
Atmospheric Transport: Area and Point source of pollutants in air, box model for area source plume model 
for poin t sources, dry and wet deposition at surfaces or soil, uptake by plant roots, transpiration, 
metabolism and photo -degradation [Lectures 5].  
 
Text Books  
Louis J. Thibodeaux , Environmental Chemodynamics: Movement of Chemicals in Air, Water, and Soil, 2nd 
Edition,1996, ISBN: 978 -0-471-61295 -7 
Stefan Trapp, and Michael Matthies, Chemodynamics and Environmental Modeling, Springer -Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg 1998,  ISBN -13: 978 -3-642-80431 -1 e-ISBN -13: 978 -3-642-80429 -8 
 
Open Source Models  
ICECRM 1.1 (indoor chemical exposure classification/ranking model)  
The CoZMoMAN Model - The Multimedia fate and transport models  
The Global Distribution Model (Globo -POP Version 1. 1)- Global fate of organic chemicals  
 
NPTEL  
Dr Bhanu Prakash Vellanki,Environmental Remediation of Contaminated sites,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/107/105107181/, IIT Roorkee  
Dr Manoj Datta, Geoenvironmental Engineering, (Environmental Geotechnology) ; Landfills, Slurry Ponds 
& Contaminated Sites, IIT Delhi https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/102/105102160/#  
100 
 Title  Climate Change and Impact  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-4 [5]  
Offered for  M.Tech, M.Tech. -Ph.D.  [CIE]  Type  Specialization Stream 
Elective  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
To gain understanding of scientific foundation and key concepts of atmospheric science, climate data 
collection and impacts of GHGs.  
To develop the scientific basis of our understanding of the climate system and climate change, and 
associated uncertainties.  
To provide knowledge on the impacts of climate change on the natural world in the current scenario and 
coming centuries.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to a chieve proficiency in:  
Understanding the present climate system in the context of Earth’s history, reconstructing climate evolution 
and relevant scientific uncertainties.  
Developing basics of climate change science with key concepts of climate, weather, e nergy balance and 
GHG effect.  
Understanding energy flows within the Earth -Atmosphere system.  
Explaining the large -scale atmospheric circulations with underlying fluid mechanics principles and role of 
oceans in climate variability.  
Developing scientific un derstanding of climate forcing, sensitivity and feedback systems.  
Understanding the basics of energy balance models and fundamental equations of Global Circulation 
Models for simulating and estimating past and future climate systems.  
Understanding the potential impacts of climate change and future climate change projections.  
 
Contents  
Introduction to Climate and Climate Change: Evolution of Earth’s climate: history, Instrumental and 
paleoclimatic record, Climate Change:  Definition,  Components of climate  system, Global energy balance, 
GHGs and Greenhouse effect [Lectures 5].  
Radiative Energy Transfer: Radiation laws,  Radiation Processes, Absorption and Scattering by Gases and 
Particles, Solar Zenith Angle and Aerosol Optical Depth, Radiative Transfer Equa tion [Lectures 5].  
Convection and Atmospheric Circulation:  Dry and moist convection,  Atmospheric convection and types, 
Scales of motion, Energy and Momentum Transport [Lectures 7].  
Oceanic Circulation: Physical characteristics of ocean, Energy transport m echanism: Wind driven 
circulation theories, and thermohaline circulation [Lectures 4].  
Climate sensitivity and feedback mechanisms: Equilibrium Climate sensitivity,  Transient Climate 
Response, Feedback: Concept, Fast and slow feedback mechanisms/Processes,  Climate sensitivity estimates 
[Lectures 5].  
Climate Variability:  Buffering atmospheric temperature changes, Atmosphere -ocean coupling: El Nino and 
Southern Oscillations [Lectures 3].  
Climate modeling: One layer energy balance model, 1D EBM, Global Circul ation Model, difference between 
Weather forecast models and GCMs [Lectures 8].  
Climate Change Impacts and future projections: Sea level rise, Ecosystem and biodiversity, Shifting water 
resources, Agricultural impacts, severe weather impacts and Human healt h; Impact assessment of GHGs 
on global temperature, rainfall and drought patterns, atmospheric circulation. [Lectures 5].  
Laboratory  
Time series analysis of century -long historical temperature records to understand climate variability and 
examine evidence  of global warming.  
Statistical analysis of sea surface temperature for identification of ENSO (El Nino -Southern Oscillations) 
events.  
Hadley Circulation interpretation using NASA MERRA reanalysis model.  
Model scenarios of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in  the current century and simulate first -order 
response of the earth system (e.g., ClimateSim simulator).  
Download emissions data from satellite observations and compare with existing emission inventories.  
101 
 Hand -on experience on installation of Regional/ Glo bal Climate model (RCM/GCM) and performing 
simulations to compare the model output (climate variables and Emissions) under different Representative 
Concentration Pathways (RCPs) with existing emission inventories.    
Group report on “ Scientific Evidence for Anthropogenic Climate Change”  
  
Text Books  
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics - From Air Pollution to Climate Change, J. H. Seinfeld and S. N. Pandis, 
John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Third Edition, 2013.  
Fundamentals of Atmospheric modeling, Marck Jacobson, C ambridge University Press, Second Edition, 
2005.  
Air Pollution and Global Warming: History, Science and Solutions, Mark Jacobson, Cambridge University 
Press, Second Edition, 2012.  
Atmosphere, Ocean, and Climate Dynamics, John Marshall and R. Alan Plumb, El sevier Academic Press, 
2008.  
 
Online course Material  
https://courses.edx.org/courses/course -v1:SDGAcademyX+CCSI001+3T2019/course/  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/119106008/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
102 
 Title  Remote Sensing and GIS for Environment 
Management  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-2 [4]  
Offered for  M.Tech, M.Tech. -Ph.D. [CIE -EE] Type  Specialization 
Stream Elective  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
To introduce you to the basic principles of observing the Earth’s geography and concepts of remote sensing  
To explore its applications specific to the environment and natural resource management.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Identify and obtain appropriate satellite imagery for a land surface based resource management, service 
infrastructure and real world application  
Demonstrate prof iciency in the common ( open source: QGIS/ Google Earth Engine, ERDAS Imagine, 
ENVI) and advanced (ARCGIS, Ecognition, QT modeler) remote sensing software packages  
Conduct basic to intermediate remote sensing analyses (atmospheric and geographic correction s, spectral 
transformations and enhancements, classification, modelling and change detection)  
 
Contents  
In-situ field observation; data collection; Photographic and Remote Sensing data collection, Spectral spatial 
and temporal aspects, analog and digital processing introduction and sensing economics [4]  
Electromagnetics: conduction, convection and radiation; radiation and its models, [6].  
Aerial Photography - Camera, photography filtration -films, planning field missions [4]  
Photogrammetry : Aerial photogra phy, stereoscopy and its principles, image digitization, aero -
triangulation, extracting spot elevation, contours and DEMs using soft copy photography, Ortho -imagery 
and Area Measurement [6]  
Multispectral Imagery: discrete detectors and scanning mirrors, Landsat: multi -spectral scanner,  thematic 
mapper, Enhanced Thematic Mapper plus (Landsat 7), , GOES -,AVHRR Radiometer, Aircraft Multispectral 
Scanners[8]  
Thermal Infrared Remote Sensing: Thermal infrared radiation properties, laws (Stefan -bolzmann, Wein’s , 
Kirchoff’s)[2]  
Microwave Remote Sensing: RADAR, SAR remote sensing, Radar interferometry, LIDAR Passive 
Microwave Remote Sensing - Radiometers. [3]  
Visual image Interpretation: The aerial/regional perspective, 3D depth perspective [5]  
Digital Image Inter pretation and Analysis: Preprocessing of Images, Image Enhancement, Contrast and 
basics of spatial feature manipulation. [5]  
Note: Labs will have hands -on use of the latest Google Earth Engine (GEE), QGIS, ERDAS IMAGINE, and 
ArcGIS software. It will also l ook into application of remote sensing imagery in soil and water analysis, 
overlaying data retrieved from different subject areas of engineering, lidar imagery and other GIS data.  
List of experiments in Surveying based Laboratory  
To assess the distance be tween two inaccessible points in a specific area using a compass as well as plotting 
the area using closed traverse (prismatic compass).  
To solve two -point, and three -point problems using plane table survey.  
To understand differential levelling, vertical/cross sectional plotting and contouring using automatic 
levellers.  
To survey a nearby plot bounded by any polygon using a theodolite and also to perform trigonometric 
levelling to find the characteristics of a nearby building.  
To plot a known are a using GPS measurements and assess the accuracy of the measurement  
Using total station to combine electromagnetic distance measurement and electronic theodolite to 
understand the ramp in the institute and their geometrical features with high accuracy.  
List of experiments in GIS Laboratory  
To create a map of any area using vector data models using available ground data.  
To perform geo -referencing when coordinate values are not given.  
To study terrain data such as slope, aspect, and hill shade. How to use  these for representation of different 
social/service as well as frequency of different aspects concerning demographic data.  
To create a stream network or perform stream order generation or delineate watersheds created by a water 
body using DEM files.  
103 
 To perform site suitability analysis for a service building (example hospital) near to an agricultural and 
inhabited land near an arid village at the edge of an oasis near Jodhpur.  
Basic experiments on image sharpening and image resolution using ArcGIS/ ERD AS IMAGINE processing 
tool.  
 
Text Books  
John R. Jenkins, Remote Sensing of the Environment: An Earth Perspective  
Lillesand, T.M., Kiefer, R.W. & Chipman, J.W. 2008. Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation, 6th Edition, 
John Wiley and Sons.  
 
Reference Book s 
Floyd F. Sabins, Remote Sensing: Principles and Applications (3rd edition), Publisher : Waveland Press, 
Edition : 3rd, Print ISBN : 9781577665076, 1577665074, eText ISBN : 9781478618171.0  
Gopi, S., Sathikumar, R., and Madhu, N., Advanced Surveying: Total  Station, GIS and Remote Sensing, 
Pearson, 2007, Dorling Kindersley (India).ISBN 978 -81-3017 -0067 -9. 
Barrett, E.C. & Curtis, L.F. 2007. Introduction to Environmental Remote Sensing, Routledge Publisher.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
104 
 Title  Solid Waste Management  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  M. Tech, M. Tech -Ph.D. [CIE -EE] Type  Specialization Stream 
Elective  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
To enable understanding of life cycle of  waste generation to disposal or sustainable re -use 
To inculcate basic steps of solid waste management  
To enable selection of best possible location specific solid waste management options  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Conceptually design waste conversion/treatment  processes  
Able to assess the environmental and the economic impact of specific types of solid waste generated and its 
reuse  
Enabled to develop innovative and smarter solutions of solid waste management at rural and urban 
environs  
 
Contents  
Solid waste ty pe and Classification, Quantity, Types of Waste Stream and its life cycle Waste Generation - 
Industrial, Municipal and Agriculture, 4R strategies and Social costs [Lectures 4].  
Collection and Transport: Collection Components, their Reliability, Scavengers, Automated Waste 
Collection, Design for Larger Transfer Operations, Automated Control, Inventory and Monitoring [Lectures 
5]. 
Separation and Processing Techniques: Separation and Screening Equipment, Automated Sorters, Solid 
Waste Processing, Recovering, Wa ste to Energy transformation, E -Waste, Size Reduction, Incineration and 
pyrolysis [Lectures 6].  
Options for Disposal, Selection Criteria, Sanitary Landfill, Properties of Gases from Landfills, Hazards and 
Air Pollution, , Leachate Control and Management [L ectures 5].  
Composting: Benefits of Composting, Biological Processes Involved in Composting Chemical Processes, 
Physical Processes, Thermodynamics of Compositing, Gasifying, Refuse -derived fuel,  Thoughts on Circular 
Economy [Lectures 8].  
Microbiology: Biological decomposition, Microbiology of composting, Municipal solid waste Pathogens, 
enteric microbes in landfills and leachate, Pure culture, Mixed culture screening tests [Lectures 6].  
Reuse and Recycle: Reuse, Increased Product Lifetime, Material Life  Cycle Studies, Recycling, New 
Materials -Self Destructing/Organic, MSW Handling Rules,  Public Aptitude, and Legislation [Lectures 6].  
 
Text Books  
George Tchobanoglous, Hilary Theisen, Samuel Vigil, Integrated Solid Waste Management: Engineering 
Principles and Management Issues, McGraw -Hill Series in Water Resources and Environmental 
Engineering, ISBN -10: 0070632375, ISBN -13: 978 -0070632370  
Kanti L. Shah, Basics of Solid and Hazardous Waste Management Technology, Prentice Hall, ISBN -10: 
0139603786, ISBN -13: 978-0139603785  
Ni-Bin Chang, Ana Pires, Sustainable Solid Waste Management: A Systems Engineering Approach, Wiley -
IEEE Press; 1 edition (March 16, 2015), ISBN -10: 1118456912, ISBN -13: 978 -1118456910  
 
References Books  
Edward A. McBean, Frank A. Rovers, Gra hame J. Farquhar, Solid Waste Landfill Engineering and Design, 
Prentice Hall; ISBN -10: 0130791873, ISBN -13: 978 -0130791870  
Christian Ludwig, Stefanie Hellweg, Municipal Solid Waste Management , Springer 2003, London, ISBN 
978-3-642-62898 -6.  
Roger Tim Haug , Composting Engineering: Principles and Practice, Ann Arbor Science, MI, ISBN -0-250-
40347 -1 
 
Online Resources  
T V Ramachandra Municipal Solid Waste Management, IISc Bangalore 
https://nptel.ac.in/co urses/120108005/  
Solid and Hazardous Waste Management,IITM, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105106056/  
105 
 Title  Advanced Wastewater Treatment  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Chemical Engineering,  
(ii) Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P 
[C] 3-0-2 [4]  
Offered for  M.Tech, M.Tech. -Ph.D. [CIE -EE] Type  (i) Programme Elective for 
Chemical Engineering,  
(ii) Specialization Stream 
Elective for Environmental 
Engineering  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The instructor will:  
Impart comprehensive knowledge of industrial and municipal wastewater.  
Discuss mechanism and methodologies for wastewater treatment.  
Discuss case studies.   
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the:  
1. Comprehensive knowled ge of wastewater treatment.  
2. Knowledge of advanced methodologies such as recycle and reuse.  
 
Contents  
Introduction: Waste water engineering: an overview, characterisation of waste water and  
monitoring of industrial and municipal wastewater, emerging contaminants, environmental impacts of 
wastewater constituents [Lectures 4].  
Conventional Water and WasteWater Treatment: Existing unit operations and processes, basic  
philosophy of water treatment plants; physio -chemical treatment methods: (i)    Screeni ng, (ii) 
conventional filtration (iii) coagulation, (iv) flocculation, (v) floatation (vi) Clari - flocculation (vii) 
sedimentation, (viii) sand filtration, etc. [Lectures 10].  
Aerobic and Anaerobic Suspended and Attached Growth WasteWater Treatment Process es:  
Aerated lagoon, activated sludge systems, trickling filter, sequential batch reactor, fluidized bed 
bioreactors, Up -flow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) and hybrid Up -flow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket 
(UASB) reactors [Lectures 8].  
Advanced Treatment Proce sses: Membrane Filtration, reverse osmosis, ultrafiltration,  
nanofiltration and electrodialysis; wet air oxidation, adsorption and ion -exchange; Wet - 
land and root -zone treatment of industrial and municipal wastes; Design of sludge drying  
beds, thermal a nd biological processes for sludge and land fillings. Membrane Reactors,  
New Technologies for Wastewater Disinfection [Lectures 12].  
Water Recycling and Reuse: Different unit operations for water recycling depending on  end use, energy 
considerations, rec overy of valuables from wastewater, zero liquid discharge (ZLD) [Lectures 8].   
Wastewater design lab [28 hours]  
Clarifier  
Aerator  
Sand filtration system  
Municipal waste water system  
Grey water treatment system  
Sewage water treatment system  
Industrial waste  water systems  
Pond water treatment  
 
Text Books  
Burton F.L., Tchobanoglous G., Stensel H.D., 2017, WasteWater Engineering Treatment and Reuse, 
4thed.,Tata McGraw -Hill.  
Arceivala S.J. and Asolekar S.R., 2007, Wastewater Treatment for Pollution Control and Reuse, 3rd Ed., 
Tata McGraw Hill.  
 
Reference Books  
106 
 Henze M., van -Loosdrecht M.C.M., Ekama G.A. and Brdjanovic D., 2008, Biological Wastewater 
Treatment: Principles, Modelling and Design, IWA publishing.  
Sincero A.P. and Sincero G.A., 1996, Environmental En gineering – A Design Approach, Prentice -Hall.  
Online Course Material  
Tiwari M K, Wastewater treatment and recycling, NPTEL course material, Department of Civil 
Engineering, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105178/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
107 
 Title  Environmental Economics and 
Management  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  (i) Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering  
(ii) School of Management and 
Entrepreneurship  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  M.Tech, M.Tech. -Ph.D. [CIE]  Type  Specialization Stream 
Elective  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
To introduce the methods used by Economists in analyzing environment related issues.  
To introduce concepts of positive and normative aspects of Environmental Economics.  
To provide knowledge on different approaches such as Regulations and Incentive based Programs used 
in controlling pollution.  
  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in:  
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in:  
Explaining the interactions b etween the economy and environment.  
Understanding the concepts of market failure and their role in determining the level of environmental 
quality.  
Understanding the role of costs and benefits in environmental decision -making processes.  
Explaining the conc eptual framework and theoretical basis of economic valuation research  
Recognizing and implementing the most appropriate techniques while performing economic valuation 
research.                                              
Employing regulatory tools to deal  with pollution control.  
 
Contents  
Introduction: The environment and economics, Cost of Environmental Protection, Positive and 
Normative Analysis [Lectures 4].  
Principles of Environmental and Resource Economics: Markets and Market Failure, cost -benefit analysis 
[Lectures 10].  
Economic Valuation: Random utility models in environmental valuation, Hedonic Price Method, 
Defensive Expenditures and the Travel Cost Method, Contingent Valuation [Lectures 10].  
Controlling Pollution: : Regulation, Pigouvian Fees/ Emission Fees & Marketable permits, Property 
Rights and Marketable Permits, Regulation over Time and Space/ Transboundary Pollution, Regulations 
under Uncertainty (Regulating Polluters with Unknown Costs) [Lectures 12].  
Life Cycle Assessment of Products, P rocesses and Services; Special topics and case studies on 
environmental economics; Environmental Justice and Environmental Ethics; Environmental Movement; 
Environmental Activism [Lectures 6].  
 
Text Books  
Environmental Economics, Charles. D. Kolstad, Oxford  University Press, Second Edition, 2011.  
Environmental Economics in Theory and Practice, N. Hanley, J. F. Shorgen, B. White, Macmillan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
108 
 Title  Environmental Impact Assessment  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Chemical Engineering  
Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  M.Tech, M.Tech. -Ph.D. [CIE]  Type  (i) Programme Elective for Chemical 
Engineering, (ii) Specialization 
Stream Elective for Environmental 
Engineering  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The instructor will:  
Impart the knowledge to the students with the methods of assessment of environmental impacts due to 
developmental and industrial activities.  
Expose the students with the EIA regulations and EMP.  
 
Learning Outcomes   
The students are expected to have the:  
In-depth knowledge of the methods of assessment of environmental impacts due to developmental and 
industrial activities.  
In-depth knowledge of EIA regulations and EMP.  
 
Contents  
Introduction to EIA; definitions and concepts; evoluti on of EIA; historical development of EIA; 
forecasting environmental changes; strategic environmental assessment; ISO provisions, environmental 
clearance procedure [Lectures 11].  
EIA documentation and processes; preliminary stages of EIA; project types and screening; impact 
prediction; evaluation and mitigation; EIA monitoring and auditing. [Lectures 11].  
EIA regulations; TOR for EIAs; environmental indices, EIA at regional level, sectoral level, and policy 
level; sustainable development; Environmental Manag ement Plan (EMP)  [Lectures 11].  
Future strategies and EIA case studies  [Lectures 9].  
 
Text Books  
Canter, L., Environmental Impact Assessment, McGraw Hill, New York, 1996.  
 
Reference Books  
World Bank, ‘Environmental Assessment SourceBook’, Environment Dept. , Washington D.C., 1991.  
Rau, G.J. and Wooten, C.D., Environmental Impact Analysis Handbook, McGraw Hill, New York, 1980. 
Preventive environmental management.  
 
Online course Material  
https://nptel.a c.in/courses/127105018/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
109 
 Title  Machine Learning for Environmental 
Engineering  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  M.Tech, M.Tech. -Ph.D. [CIE]  Type  Specialization Stream 
Elective  
Prerequisite  Statistics for Environmental 
Engineering    
Anti -requisite  Machine Learning -I   
Objectives  
To introduce students to various multivariate data analysis tools to deal with multi -dimensional data.  
Appreciate the areas of Environmental Engineering problems and issues where they can be effectively 
applied.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students will be able to:  
1.   Identify appropriate multivariate data analysis techniques.  
2.   Develop a good understanding of the conceptual framework of how these multivariate techniques 
work and applied.  
 
Contents  
(Fractal 1) CSL7XX1: Machine Learning I: Supervised Learning 1 -0-0[1] 
Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logis tic regression [Lectures 2].  
Gradient Descent: Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic Gradient Descent 
for risk minimization [Lectures 2].  
Support Vector Machines: Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel tric k, 
Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels [Lectures 4].  
Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests [Lectures 2].  
 
Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, SGD and 
Backpropagation [Lectures 3].  
Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k -fold cross -validation, Training -
Validation -Testing split, Regularized loss minimization [Lecture 1].  
(Fractal 2) CSL7XX2: Machine Learning I: Unsupervised Learning and Generative Models 1 -0-0[1] 
Nearest Neighbour: k -nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality [Lecture 1].  
Clustering: Linkage -based clustering algorithms, k -means algorithm, Spectral clustering [Lectures 3].  
Dimensionality reduction: Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Co mpressed sensing 
[Lectures 2].  
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis, Latent 
variables and Expectation -maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning [Lectures 5].  
Feature Selection and Generation: Feature se lection, Feature transformations, Feature learning [Lectures 
4]. 
(Fractal 3) Application to Environmental Data 1 -0-1 [1]: Assessment of Surface water quality parameters; 
Assessment of Landfill leachate treatment; Air Quality Assessment and source recogniti on; Spatial 
differences in river estuaries and possible sources, Miscellaneous case studies [Lectures 14].  
 
Text Books  
1. Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis, Johnson, R. A. and Wichern, D. W., Pearson Prentice Hall, 
Sixth Edition, 2007.  
2.  Multivariate Statistical Methods: A Primer, Manly, B. F. J., Chapman and Hall/CRC, Third Edition, 
2005.  
3.  Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis, Wolfgang, K. H. and Leopold, S., Springer, Fourth Edition, 
2015.  
4. Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to Algorithms, Shalev -Shwartz,S., Ben -David,S., 
Cambridge University Press, 2014.  
5. Applied Statistics for Environmental Science with R, Alkarkhi, A. F. M. and Alqaraghuli, W. A. A., 
Elsevier, ISBN 978 -0-12-818622 -0.  
 
110 
 Reference Books  
Mitchell Tom  (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw -Hill  
 
Online course material  
https://online.stat.psu.edu/stat505/  
 
Self Learning Material  
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,    https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
111 
 Title  Geomorphology  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  M.Tech,  M.Tech. -Ph.D. [CIE]  Type  Specialization Stream 
Elective  
Prerequisite     
Objectives   
The instructor will:  
Introduction to different geological processes behind observed geomorphological features.  
Complete understanding of depositional and erosional landforms created in different environments.  
Knowledge of natural hazards and application of geomorphology in managing them.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the:  
Understanding of physics and chemistry of geological processes and their interrelationship.  
Knowledge of spatial and temporal evolution of different landforms.  
Knowledge of geological hazard identification, risk assessment, and mitigation.  
 
Contents  
Intro duction to Geomorphology: Introduction to geomorphology and physical geology; Earth’ 
components: atmosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere, biosphere; The age of the earth: absolute dating 
methods; relative dating methods; Geological time scale [Lectures: 4]  
Weathering and Mass Wasting: Types of weathering: physical, mechanical, chemical, and biological; 
Rates of weathering; The stability of minerals; Weathering of common rocks; Mass wasting processes; 
Factors responsible for mass wasting [Lectures: 4]  
Fluvial G eomorphology: Development stages of a stream; Classification of streams; Genetic classification 
of streams;  Stream channels; Channel geomorphology; Drainage basin and system; Basin morphology; 
Geological work of streams; Fluvial landforms. [Lectures: 5]  
Desert Geomorphology: Process of wind erosion; Sediment transport by wind; Erosional landforms; 
Depositional landforms; Desert and desert types; Surface processes and desert landforms; Aridity. 
[Lectures: 4]  
Glacial Geomorphology: Formation of glaciers; Gla cier movement; Glacier types; Glacial processes; 
Erosional landforms; Depositional landforms. [Lectures: 4]  
Coastal Geomorphology: Ocean waves, currents and tides; Oceanic sediments; Shore processes; Coastal 
erosion and sediment transport; Depositional fea tures formed by waves. [Lectures: 5]  
Tectonic Geomorphology: Continental drift and evidence; Plate tectonics; Continental crust and plate 
tectonics; Causes of plate tectonics; geomorphic markers; Paleoseismology; Deformation and landscape 
responses. [Lectu res: 4]  
Earthquakes: Location of an earthquake; Measurement and classification; The cause of origin; Spatial and 
temporal distribution of earthquakes; Earthquake hazard. [Lectures: 4]  
Volcanoes: Magma and lava flows; Global distribution of volcanoes; Class ification of volcanoes; Modes 
of eruption; Volcanic Explosivity Index; Volcanic landforms; Submarine volcanoes. [Lectures: 4]  
Applied Geomorphology: Geomorphological hazard; Hazard assessment for risk analysis and risk 
management; Geomorphic hazards and su stainable development; Geomorphology and disaster 
prevention. [Lectures: 4]  
 
Text Books  
Sreepat Jain (2014) Fundamental of Physical Geology. Springer. ISBN 978 -81-322-1539 -4. 
Richard J. Huggett (2007). Fundamentals of Geomorphology (2nd Ed). Taylor & Franc is Group. ISBN 978 -
0-203-94711 -1 ebk.  
 
Additional Reading  
Douglas W. Burbank, Robert S. Anderson (2011) Tectonic Geomorphology (2nd Ed). Wiley -Blackwell; 
ISBN: 978 -1-444-33886 -7 
Ro Charlton (2007) Fundamentals of Fluvial Geomorphology (1st Ed). Taylor & Francis Group. ISBN: 
9780203371084  
Eric C. F. Bird (2008) Coastal Geomorphology: An Introduction (2nd Ed). Wiley. ISBN: 978 -0-470-51729 -1 
112 
 Anthony J. Parsons, A. D. Abrahams (2009) Geomorphology of Desert Environments. Springer. ISBN 978 -
1-4020 -5719 -9 
I Alc ántara -Ayala, A. Goudie (Eds.). (2010). Geomorphological Hazards and Disaster Prevention. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511807527  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
113 
 Title  GIS and Public health  Number  CI7XX0  
Department  Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  L-T-P [C]  3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for  M.Tech, M.Tech. -Ph.D. [CIE]  Type  Specialization Stream 
Elective  
Prerequisite     
Objectives  
The instructor will:  
Providing exposure to the application of GIS in infectious and vector -borne diseases analysis.  
Introducing techniques of GIS in management of health services.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
Ability to accurately model temporal and spatial distribution of health events.  
Knowledge of surveillance and mapping techniques for inf ectious and vector -borne diseases.  
Ability to identify healthcare “shortage” areas and analysis of access to healthcare services.  
 
Contents  
Geographic Information Systems: GIS functions; Trends in GIS applications; Public health application of 
GIS; GIS and the internet [Lectures 3].  
Spatial data: Field and object data; Tessellation and vector data models; Measuring locations; Scale, 
projection, and symbols of cartographic data sources; Geographic data quality; Role of metadata [Lectures 
3]. 
Spatial Datab ases for Public Health: Foundation spatial data; population data; Health data; Making 
population and health data mappable; database integration; Data sharing [Lectures 3].  
Mapping Health Information: Mapping process; representing health information; viewin g health 
information; GIS and map publication [Lectures 3].  
Analyzing Spatial Clustering of Health Events: Mapping disease rates; spatial clustering methods; space -
time clustering; choosing a clustering method; uses of spatial clustering methods [Lectures 4]. 
Analyzing Environmental Hazards: Source location analysis; modelling of fate, transport, and 
environment quality; GIS and exposure modelling; GIS and dose; outcome surveillance; environmental 
risk management; issues in environmental health mapping and analysis [Lectures 5].  
Analyzing the Risk and Spread of infectious Diseases: Spatial diffusion; mapping case distributions; 
mapping the ecology of risk; temporal and geographical trends in disease outbreaks; forecasting spatial 
diffusion of communicable di seases; planning public health interventions; privacy and confidentiality 
[Lectures 5].  
Exploring the Ecology of Vector -Borne Diseases: Global burden of zoomatic diseases and the challenge 
of emerging infectious diseases; surveillance and mapping of vector -borne diseases; modelling of vector -
borne diseases; environmental impacts of controlling vector -borne diseases; systematic perspective on 
disease [Lectures 4].  
Analyzing Access to Health Services: mapping service locations; mapping health care needs and s ervices; 
assessing potential access to health services; analysing service utilization [Lectures 4].  
Locating Health Services: health care shortage areas; components and dimensions of health service 
delivery systems; client population distribution; meaning of “centrality” in health service facility location; 
normative models of facility location and service delivery; incorporating normative models of facility 
location and service delivery into GIS; spatial decision support systems [Lectures 4].  
Health dispar ities: context and composition; visualizing and measuring area characteristics; defining 
neighbourhood contexts; modelling neighbourhood effects on health; location processes and link between 
location and well -being [Lectures 4].  
 
Text Books  
GIS and Public  Health, Ellen K. Cromley, Sara L. McLafferty, Guilford Publications, Second Edition, 2017, 
ISBN 978 -1-60918 -750-7. 
GIS in Public Health Practice, Ravi Maheswaram, Massimo Craglia, CRC Press, 2004, ISBN 0 -415-30655 -
8. 
 
 
